                                2. Introductory and Summary Comments


•   Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC)
•   U.S. Patent and Trademark Ofﬁce (USPTO)

Research to establish the knowledge base that is used by regulatory agencies to inform their decision-
making process may be performed by Federal agencies, such as NSF, NIH, NIST, EPA, FDA, NIOSH,
OSHA, USDA, DOE, and DOD, or may be performed by industry or other private sector research
institutions.

The materials and products based on nanotechnology are regulated today within the existing network
of statutes, regulations, rules, guidelines, and other voluntary activities. Nanostructures are evaluated
by various groups and in different countries as “chemicals with new uses” or as “new chemicals.”
In some cases, pre-market review and approval are required (e.g., drugs, food packaging, and new
chemical compounds). In other cases, post-market surveillance and monitoring apply (e.g., cosmetics
and most consumer products). The existing regulatory network will be modiﬁed, if necessary.
Examples of regulatory laws and standards applicable to nanoparticles and other nanostructures
include the following:

•   In the environment (in air, water, soils):
    −   Toxic Substances Control Act (TSCA), administered by the EPA
    −   Clean Air Act for ultraﬁne particles, administered by the EPA
    −   Waste disposal acts, administered by the EPA
•   In the work place (aerosol-based standards based on existing health risk data):
    −   Permissible Exposure Limits (PELs), established by the Occupational Safety and Health
        Administration (OSHA)
    −   Recommended Exposure Limits (RELs), established by the National Institute of
        Occupational Safety and Health
    −   Threshold Limit Values (TLVs), established by the American Conference of Government
        Industrial Hygienists (ACGIH)
    −   Personal Protective Equipment to reduce exposure, established by the OSHA and ASTM
        (American Society for Testing and Materials)
•   Nanoparticles for drugs to be metabolized in the human body, to be used as diagnostics or
    therapeutic medical devices (such as quantum dots); regulated by the FDA.
•   Nanostructured particles/substances to be incorporated into food; the FDA and USDA share
    regulatory authority (such as food additives, food coloring).
•   Substances incorporated into consumer products; regulated by the Consumer Product Safety
    Commission (CPSC) under the Federal Hazardous Substances Act. A focus is on protection of
    children, who are more susceptible and who sometimes put objects in their mouth that were not
    intended for that purpose.

Under NEHI coordination, the EPA, FDA, CPSC, OSHA, NIOSH, NIST, USDA, and other agencies
are reviewing existing rules and procedures to determine how to use the existing statutes and regulations
to review products of nanotechnology, as these products are developed. Where new nanotechnology




                                Nanotechnology: Societal Implications                                 31
