                    METROPOLITAN SCHOOL DISTRICT OF DECATUR TOWNSHIP
                              AUDIT RESULTS AND COMMENTS
                                       (Continued)


          Supporting documentation such as receipts, canceled checks, tickets, invoices, bills, contracts, and
other public records must be available for audit to provide supporting information for the validity and account-
ability of monies disbursed. Payments without supporting documentation may be the personal obligation of
the responsible official or employee. (Accounting and Uniform Compliance Guidelines Manual for Indiana
Public School Corporations, Chapter 9)

       Every effort should be made by the governmental unit to avoid unreasonable or excessive costs.
(Accounting and Uniform Compliance Guidelines Manual for Indiana Public School Corporations, Chapter 9)


AVERAGE DAILY MEMBERSHIP (ADM) - CLASSROOM LISTS

         The School Corporation did not retain the student lists by classroom that support the ADM Count
figures for the 2009-2010 and the 2010-2011 school years. The State Board of Accounts' position is that
these student lists should be signed by the principals or other administrators at the individual building level
and retained for inspection. The School Corporation has made changes designed to retain these records in
the future.

       Officials shall maintain records (enrollment cards, rosters, reporting forms, etc.) which substantiate
the number of students claimed for ADM.

        The building level official (Principal, Assistant Principal, etc.) is responsible for reporting ADM to the
School Corporation Central Office, should provide a written certification of ADM to properly document
responsibility. The certification should at a minimum include a statement detailing the names and location of
the records used (these records must be retained for public inspection and audit) to substantiate ADM
claimed. (Accounting and Uniform Compliance Guidelines Manual for Indiana Public School Corporations,
Chapter 8)


APPROPRIATIONS

        The records presented for audit indicated the following expenditures in excess of budgeted
appropriations for the 2010 Budget Year:

                                            Fund                               Amount

                        Retirement/Severance Bond Debt Service             $     389,865
                        Capital Projects                                         694,640
                        School Transportation                                  1,320,677

        The School Corporation adopted an additional appropriation ordinance on December 14, 2010, for
the Transportation Fund and the School Pension Debt Fund but these actions were denied by the Department
of Local Government and Finance.

         Indiana Code 6-1.1-18-4 states in part: ". . . the proper officers of a political subdivision shall
appropriate funds in such a manner that the expenditures for a year do not exceed its budget for that year as
finally determined under this article."




                                                      -42-
