                               2. Introductory and Summary Comments


The main goals of the NNI are to:

•   Maintain a world-class research and development program aimed at realizing the full potential
    of nanotechnology
•   Facilitate transfer of the new technologies into products for economic growth, jobs and other
    public beneﬁt
•   Develop educational resources, a skilled workforce, and the supporting infrastructure and tools
    to advance nanotechnology
•   Support responsible development of nanotechnology
Indeed, nanotechnology’s shift in focus from the microscale to the molecular and nanoscale will be
essential for future advances in both the digital revolution and modern biology—and may change
the very foundation of education, medicine, manufacturing, and the environment. Initially, the NNI
was driven by science as outlined in “Nanotechnology Research Directions” [4], but after 2002,
technological innovation rose in importance. Industry has become a strong supporter and its long-
term R&D nanotechnology investment is expected to surpass the Federal NNI expenditures next
year. Also, more than 20 states in the United States have realized that nanotechnology has economic
potential and made multi-annual ﬁnancial commitments in 2003 to nanotechnology that total more
than half the NNI annual budget. The worldwide government investment in nanotechnology (in part
stimulated by the NNI) is about $4 billion in 2005, a ninefold increase as compared to about $430
million in 1997 (Table 2.2, Fig. 2.1).




Figure 2.1. International Context—Government nanotechnology R&D investments in the past eight years,
            1997-2005.

Nanotechnology is expanding in a natural and robust way. We are creating the systematic control of
matter at the nanoscale. We have clear research and education needs in the national and international
context. The White House and Congress have recognized the importance of nanotechnology in the
future of the United States through the NNI Supplement to the President’s FY 2004 Budget [5] and
the 21st Century Nanotechnology Research and Development Act [6]. The NNI, in collaboration with
other worldwide nanotechnology programs, has the potential to bring broad societal changes, from



                               Nanotechnology: Societal Implications                                   23
