                                                   DRAFT Management’s Discussion and Analysis


Balance Sheet
The Balance Sheet presents the total amounts available for use by NSF (assets) against the amounts owed
(liabilities) and amounts that comprise the difference (net position). NSF’s total assets are largely
composed of Fund Balance with Treasury. A significant balance also exists in the General Property,
Plant and Equipment (PP&E) account.

In FY 2011, Total Assets (Figure 10) decreased
1.7 percent from FY 2010 assets. The bulk of
the change occurred in the Fund Balance with
Treasury account, which decreased by $283.6
million in FY 2011. Fund Balance with
Treasury is funding available from which NSF
is authorized to make expenditures and pay
amounts due through the disbursement authority
of the Department of Treasury. It is increased
through appropriations and collections and
decreased by expenditures and rescissions. The
FY 2011 decrease is attributed to the spending
of ARRA funds by grant recipients.

NSF’s Total Liabilities (Figure 11) decreased by
2.5 percent in FY 2011. The majority of this
change is related to NSF’s strides to encourage
its partnering agencies to work on a
reimbursable basis, reducing the related
Advances from Others liability.

Statement of Net Cost
This statement presents the annual cost of
operating NSF programs. The net cost of each
specific NSF program operation equals the
program’s gross cost less any offsetting revenue.
Intragovernmental      earned    revenues     are
recognized    when      related    program or
administrative expenses are incurred. Earned
revenue is deducted from the full cost of the
programs to arrive at the Net Cost of Operation.

Approximately 95 percent of all current year
NSF Net Costs of Operations incurred were
directly related to the support of the Research
and Related Activities (R&RA), Education and
Human Resources (EHR), and Major Research
Equipment        and     Facilities    Construction
(MREFC) programs. Additional costs were
incurred for indirect general operation activities
(e.g., salaries, training, and activities related to
the advancement of NSF information systems
technology) and activities of the NSB and the
OIG. These costs were allocated to the R&RA,

                                                       I-17
