                                                   Department of Defense
                                                  Base Structure Report (BSR)
                                                        FY 2007 Baseline

– BUILDINGS LEASED SQFT: Reflects the normalized RPCS building square footage for the buildings identified as leased in the
Services’ databases.

– BUILDINGS OTHER COUNT: Identifies the number of buildings not identified as owned or leased and reported by the Services
in their inventories.

– BUILDINGS OTHER SQFT: Reflects the normalized RPCS building square footage for the buildings not identified as owned or
leased in the Services’ databases.

– TOTAL ACRES: Identifies the total number of acres owned, used by, or leased to the DoD. It includes public land, land owned by
other federal agencies, and acreage of foreign soil used by DoD sites. In Sections VIII and IX, the total does not include State-Owned
land. In Section X, the total includes State-Owned land.

– PRV ($M): Total Plant Replacement Value (PRV) for all facilities (buildings, structures, and linear structures) included in the
Services RPI databases. This value is the cost to replace the current physical plant (facilities and supporting infrastructure) using
today’s construction costs (labor and materials) and standards (methodologies and codes). The PRV represents the OSD-calculated
value adjusted for facilities that exceeded the RPCS size limit; for instance, the PRV is reduced by the proportional reduction of the
facility size. In Sections VIII and IX, the value for State-Owned assets are not included. In Section X, the value of State-Owned
assets are included.

Note on Personnel Data: This information is provided ONLY to project a level of magnitude when comparing sites. The Services
do not maintain their personnel data in direct relation to their Real Property Information. While every effort was made to match the
personnel strengths to the appropriate site, the population may not reflect the actual population of the site. Detailed personnel
questions should be addressed to the appropriate Service manpower or personnel offices.

– MIL: Identifies all known military personnel authorized for the site. Includes Active Duty, Guard, and Reserve personnel,
regardless of Service affiliation.

– CIV: Identifies all known DoD civilian personnel identified for the site, regardless of Service affiliation. Note: civilian numbers for
the Navy represent assigned personnel not authorized.

– OTHER: Identifies all known other civilian personnel identified for the site, including personnel paid from Non-appropriated
Funds (NAF), Foreign Nationals (direct hire) at foreign locations, and, if available, any full-time contractor personnel, regardless of
Service affiliation.


                                                                  DoD - 5
