                       NIH Extramural Loan Repayment Programs                                  FY 2011

     The Five Extramural Loan Repayment Programs

    Clinical Research LRP:

    Clinical research is patient-oriented clinical research conducted with human subjects, or research on the
    causes and consequences of disease in human populations involving material of human origin (such as
    tissue specimens and cognitive phenomena) for which an investigator or colleague directly interacts with
    human subjects in an outpatient or inpatient setting to clarify a problem in human physiology,
    pathophysiology or disease, or epidemiologic or behavioral studies, outcomes research or health
    services research, or developing new technologies, therapeutic interventions, or clinical trials.

     Pediatric Research LRP:

     Qualified Pediatric Research is defined as research directly related to diseases, disorders, and other
     conditions in children.

     Health Disparities Research LRP:

     The scope of research qualified for this program includes basic research, clinical research or behavioral
     research directly related to health disparity populations and the medically underserved. Group is defined
     as a health disparity population: if there is a significant disparity in the overall rate of disease incidence,
     prevalence, morbidity, mortality, or survival rates in the population as compared to the health status of
     the general population.


    Clinical Research for Individuals from Disadvantaged Backgrounds LRP:

    For this program, an individual from a disadvantaged background is defined according to low family
    income levels set by the U.S. Bureau of the Census – as published in the Federal Register.

    To meet this low-income requirement candidates must demonstrate their disadvantaged status by
    submitting (1) a written statement from former school(s) where he/she qualified for Federal
    disadvantaged assistance, (2) verification of receipt of loans from either the Health Professions Student
    Loans (HPSL) or Loans for Disadvantaged Student Program, or (3) verification of a scholarship from the
    U.S. Department of Health and Human Services under the Scholarship for Individuals with Exceptional
    Financial Need.

    Contraception and Infertility Research LRP:

    Contraception research is defined as research whose ultimate goal is to provide new or improved
    methods of preventing pregnancy. Infertility research is defined as research whose long-range objective
    is to evaluate, treat, or ameliorate conditions which result in the failure of couples to either conceive or
    bear young.



                                                         2


U.S. Department of Health and Human Services – National Institutes of Health
