                                2. Introductory and Summary Comments


The ﬁrst thing we need to do is to sort legitimate concerns from imaginary ones, those that are based
on science from those based in science ﬁction. Then we must debunk and dismiss the latter and
devote time, attention, and resources to seriously address the former.

We cannot allow ourselves—or the public—to be distracted or misled by capricious claims,
foundationless fears, wanton warnings, pompous pronouncements, and arbitrary assertions. We must
devote our efforts to addressing the legitimate concerns.

One reason we can’t afford to wait is because the public policy apparatus does not move quickly. It is
not designed to move quickly. It is a very different environment than the dynamic, fast-changing one
in which you work. So to engage effectively in the political arena, you must think and act far ahead.

Ninth Message: We need a holistic approach, with scientists and engineers playing a key role

To effectively address these questions, the NNI recognizes, we need a holistic approach that embraces
ethicists, philosophers, theologians, historians, consumer advocates, business leaders, public ofﬁcials,
and others, with scientists and engineers playing a unique and critical role.

Scientists and engineers are in the best position to contribute to sound policy development, addressing
legitimate concerns and allaying irrational public fear. Scientists and engineers alone have the
scientiﬁc and technical knowledge necessary to sort the wheat from the chaff.

In addition, while not historically great communicators, scientists and engineers have unique
credibility with the public in speaking to these issues. We need to communicate frequently, clearly,
and proactively with the public about nanotechnology to ensure that Americans have all of the
knowledge they need—complete and balanced—to make reasoned judgments on these issues, and
scientists and engineers must play a central role in this effort.

Tenth and Final Message: Addressing societal and ethical issues is the right thing and the
necessary thing

Finally, I want to leave you with this thought. Addressing societal and ethical issues is the right
thing to do and the necessary thing to do. It is the right thing to do because as ethically responsible
leaders we must ensure that technology advances human well-being and does not detract from it. It
is the necessary thing to do because it is essential for speeding technology adoption, broadening the
economic and societal beneﬁts, and accelerating and increasing our return on investment.

Under the leadership of Secretary Don Evans, the Commerce Department has adopted the theme
“American Jobs, American Values.” While exploring and dealing with societal and ethical issues
concurrently with our development and commercialization of nanotechnology, we can and must
achieve both: creating American jobs, while honoring and upholding American values!

The good news is that throughout history, we have successfully managed the downsides of
technology—often through great effort—while enjoying the extraordinary beneﬁts it yields.
Nanotechnology should be no exception.

This conference is one more critical step down that path. Thank you for your contribution to this
important work.




                               Nanotechnology: Societal Implications                                 21
