                               2. Introductory and Summary Comments


chemistry, biology, and physics of nanoscale material interactions at the molecular and cellular level
through in vitro and in vivo experiments and simulation models.

The Department of Defense is supporting a Multidisciplinary University Research Initiative (MURI)
program to create predictive models for celluar response to nanoparticles of varying size, shape,
charge, and composition and their inﬂuence on the cellular, sub-cellular, and biomolecular levels.
This research is creating a signiﬁcant body of knowledge of reactions between nanoscale materials
and biological materials.

All material stuff around us, either natural or man-made, has structure at the nanoscale. All living
cells, for instance, interact with nanostructures when they feed, breed or are touched by viruses.
Thus, facilitated by new investigative methods, development of knowledge at the nanoscale is a
natural trend in science and engineering. This knowledge may prepare us to address unexpected risks
of human activity, such as encountering unknown viruses and bacteria. The knowledge also might
help us to address challenges raised by nanostructures themselves, particularly new functions of the
same chemical composition and more reactive surfaces of nanostructures.

NNI research is developing new knowledge regarding environmental, health and safety issues through
the more than 120 projects underway at the end of 2003, including several centers at the University of
California, Davis (nanoparticles in the environment); Worcester Polytechnic Institute (air pollution);
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign (water puriﬁcation); Rice University (nanostructures in
the environment); and University of Notre Dame (nanoparticles in soils). Researchers are addressing
such questions as: What is different about artiﬁcially created nanostructures? How would those
nanostructures behave differently from bulk if released in the environment? Nanotechnology will
develop in the areas where potential advantages will exceed the impact of potential risks and where
the potential risks are limited and can be addressed. Current approaches are attempting to address
nanotechnology impacts in research or production within the existing system applications such as
biology, chemistry or electronics.

The key questions asked by technology users and the public concern economic development and
related issues, such as commercialization, education, infrastructure, and environmental, health,
ethical, and legal aspects. We have the responsibility to increase productivity, better use natural
resources, reduce poverty and hunger, improve healthcare, and enhance human resources. We also
must address health and environmental risks and related efforts to reduce them. The public policy
response must be balanced between public beneﬁt and risk. Considering the opinions of individual
groups—at times different from the largest majority and sometimes conﬂicting with scientiﬁc facts—
must occur in the context of broader societal goals.

The vision of few intelligent nanometer robots mentioned in science ﬁction literature (for example,
the novel Prey by Michael Crichton) leads to immediate criticism by some groups that are concerned
that such robots would take over the world and damage the environment. This criticism ignores input
from researchers who note that basic laws of mass and energy conservation may not lead to inﬁnitely
multiplying material objects, and that only a complex system of presumably already known living
systems may be able to multiply and be intelligent.

The government’s role is to provide R&D support for knowledge development, identify possible
risks for health, environment, and human dignity, and inform the public with a balanced approach
about the beneﬁts and potential unexpected consequences of nanotechnology.




28                               Nanotechnology: Societal Implications
