                                2. Introductory and Summary Comments


the environment since 2002; in FY 2003, 22 awards were made and, in 2004, about 12. DOE has
included nanoscience in environmental research performed at several National Laboratories, such as
Oak Ridge in Tennessee and the Environmental Molecular Sciences Laboratory in Washington State.
Additional Small Business Innovation and Research/Small Business Technology Transfer Program
(SBIR/STTR) awards were made at NSF after 1999 when nanotechnology was speciﬁcally targeted
in the respective program announcements. EPA will have an SBIR solicitation on “Nanomaterials
and Clean Technology” with a deadline in May 2004. FDA, EPA and other regulatory agencies are
following very closely the research results.

The NNI annual investment in research and education with relevance to environment has increased
progressively since 2000. Other programs dedicated to environmental implications of nanotechnology
abroad were announced in March 2003 by the European Community and in November 2003 by
Taiwan—about three years after the NSF ﬁrst called for proposals in that area.

One should not sidetrack the efforts for sustainable development by delaying or halting the creation of
new knowledge in the ﬁeld. At the international “Nanotech 2003 and Future” conference in Japan on
February 26, 2003, I made an international appeal to researchers and funding organizations “to take
timely and responsible advantage of the new technology for economic and sustainable development,
to initiate societal implications studies from the beginning of the nanotechnology programs, and
to communicate effectively the goals and potential risks with research users and the public” [11].
Since then, I’ve had discussions with representatives from the European Commission, Asia-Paciﬁc
Economic Cooperation, Switzerland, UK, Taiwan, China, Australia, and other countries about this
topic. International collaboration is necessary in a ﬁeld that does not have borders, where the products
are sold internationally, and the health and environmental aspects are of general interest.

Nanotechnology is still in the precompetitive phase in most areas where applications are foreseen,
and international collaboration is beneﬁcial. Nanotechnology has the long-term potential to bring
revolutionary changes in society and harmonize international efforts towards a higher purpose than
just advancing a single ﬁeld of science and technology or a single geographical region. A global
strategy guided by broad societal goals of mutual interest is envisioned.

Appendix: Laws and Regulations that Apply to Nanotechnology Development

On December 3, 2003, the President signed into law the 21st Century Nanotechnology Research and
Development Act [6]. A section of that law is dedicated to societal implications.

Congress issues authorization laws and funding appropriations for nanotechnology R&D to Federal
agencies participating in NNI each year. The number of participating agencies has increased from six
agencies in FY 2001 to 10 agencies in FY 2002 and 22 agencies in FY 2005.

These organizations have primary responsibility for implementing regulations and guidance in areas
relevant to nanotechnology materials and products:

•    Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)
•    Food and Drug Administration (FDA)
•    National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH)
•    Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA)
•    U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA)



30                                Nanotechnology: Societal Implications
