                               2. Introductory and Summary Comments


    scale of atoms, molecules, and their assemblies taught in the earliest years of science education.
    In 2002, NSF announced the nanotechnology undergraduate education program, and in 2003,
    the nanotechnology high school education program. In the next years, we plan to change the
    language of science even earlier and involve science museums to “seed” that language in K-12
    students. About 7,000 students and teachers have been trained in 2003 with NSF support. All
    major science and engineering colleges in the United States have introduced courses related to
    nanoscale science and engineering in the last three years.
•   Signiﬁcant infrastructure has been established in more than 60 universities with nanotechnology
    user capabilities. Five networks (Network for Computational Nanotechnology, National
    Nanotechnology Infrastructure Network, Oklahoma Network for Nanotechnology, the DOE large
    facilities network, and the NASA nanotechnology academic centers) have been established.
•   Industry investment has reached about the same level of investment as the NNI in long-term
    R&D, and almost all major companies in traditional and emerging ﬁelds have nanotechnology
    groups at least to survey the competition. For example, Intel has reported $20 billion revenues
    from nanotechnology in 2003. About 61 percent of patents (about 1,011 of 1,644) related to
    nanotechnology (searched by keywords in the title, abstract, and claims) as recorded by the U.S.
    Patent and Trade Ofﬁce in 2002 are from the United States, while the NNI funding represents
    about 25 percent of the world government investment (about $770 million of $3.0 billion).
    According to a NanoBusiness Alliance estimate of business activity in late 2003, 70 percent of
    the nanotechnology start-up companies worldwide (approximately 1,100 of 1,500) were located
    in the United States. Despite the general economic downturn, nanotechnology venture funding
    in the United States doubled in 2002 as compared to 2001. NSF supported more than 100 small
    businesses with an investment of $36 million between 2001 and 2003.
•   The NNI’s vision of a “grand coalition” of academe, government, industry, and professional groups
    is taking shape. More than 22 regional alliances have been established throughout the United
    States to develop local partnerships and support commercialization and education. Professional
    societies have established specialized divisions, organized workshops and continuing education
    programs. Among the professional societies are the American Association for the Advancement
    of Science, American Chemical Society, American Physics Society, Materials Research Society,
    American Society of Mechanical Engineers, American Institute of Chemical Engineers, Institute
    of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, and American Vacuum Society.
•   Societal implications were addressed from the start of the NNI, beginning with the ﬁrst research
    and education program on environmental and societal implications, announced in a program
    solicitation by NSF in July 2000. In September 2000, the report on Societal Implications of
    Nanoscience and Nanotechnology was issued. In 2004, the number of projects in the area grew
    signiﬁcantly, funded by NSF, EPA, NIH, DOE, and other agencies. Awareness of potential
    unexpected consequences of nanotechnology has increased, and Federal agencies meet
    periodically to discuss those issues.

Where Is the NNI Going from Here?

Nanotechnology has the potential to change our comprehension of nature and life, develop
unprecedented manufacturing tools and medical procedures, and even change societal and
international relations. The ﬁrst set of nanotechnology grand challenges was established in 1999-
2000. Let’s imagine again what could be done. I envision several potential developments by 2015:




                               Nanotechnology: Societal Implications                               25
