                                              Overview
     Pesticides of various types are used in most sectors of the U.S. Economy. In general terms, a
pesticide is any agent used to kill or control undesired insects, weeds, rodents, fungi, bacteria or
other organisms. Thus, the term “pesticide” includes insecticides, herbicides, rodenticides, fungi-
cides, nematicides, and acaracides as well as disinfectants, fumigants, wood preservatives and plant
growth regulators. Pesticides play a vital role in controlling agricultural, industrial, home/garden
and public health pests. Many crops, commodities and services in the U.S. could not be supplied in
an economic fashion without control of pests with chemicals or by other means. As a result, goods
and services can be supplied at lower costs and/or with better quality. These economic benefits from
pesticide usage are not achieved without potential risks to human health and the environment due
to the toxicity and potency of pesticide chemicals. For this reason, the chemicals are regulated under
the pesticide laws to avoid unacceptable risks.

Pesticide Types
     In terms of the chemicals involved, a majority of the active ingredients registered as pesticides
(about 875 currently) are “conventional” pesticides, i.e., ones developed and produced primarily for
use as pesticides. However, there are also other chemicals produced mostly for other purposes some
of which are used as pesticides. Notable examples are chlorine, sulfur, and petroleum which are
used as pesticides. Also, there are industrial wood preservatives and biocides, which are not
generally included in the term conventional pesticides. All of these types of pesticides are regulated
under the Pesticide Laws (principally the Federal Insecticide, Fungicide and Rodenticide Act—
FIFRA) administered by EPA in cooperation with other Federal Agencies (such as FDA and USDA)
and the States.

Overall Quantities of Pesticides Used
     About 4.5 billion pounds of chemicals are used as pesticides in the U.S. in a typical year
(measured on basis active ingredient). For 1995, the quantities used are estimated, by type of
pesticide, as follows:
                         Type                                                  Bil. of lbs.   Percent
                         Conventional pesticides                                  .97           21
                         Other pesticide chemicals (sulfur, petroleum, etc.)      .25            6
                         Subtotal                                               1.22            27
                         Wood preservatives                                       .72           16
                         Specialty biocides                                       .26            6
                         Chlorine/hypochlorites                                 2.32            51
                         Total                                                  4.52          100


     Conventional pesticides and “other pesticide chemicals” (e.g., sulfur, petroleum, etc.) account
for about one-fourth of the total pesticide active ingredient used in the U.S. (1.22 billion pounds or 27
percent of the total). A majority of these pesticides is used in agriculture to produce food and fiber
(77 percent or 939 million pounds of active ingredient in 1995), with the remainder used in industry/
government applications and by homeowners. With usage of 1.22 billion pounds for conventional

2—94/95 Pesticides Industry Sales And Usage
