                                2. Introductory and Summary Comments


•    Sometimes these technologies fall into the hands of those who do not have good intentions. We
     have seen the horrible consequences of what even a common technology can do in the hands
     of terrorists. The thought of what such people could do with more advanced technology is truly
     frightening. Here are some recent examples of what has already been done:
     −   A team of biologists recently created a polio virus in vitro “from scratch.”
     −   Researchers recently inadvertently published a technique that could be used to enhance
         the virulence of pathogens, such as anthrax or smallpox, greatly increasing their
         lethality.
     −   Scientists have synthesized a key smallpox viral protein and shown its effectiveness in
         blocking critical aspects of the human immune response.
•    Then there are the missives from respectable authors that raise even more profound concerns.
     Take, for example, Bill Joy’s infamous piece about how the future doesn’t really need us.

Faced with such fears about the impact of new technologies, people throughout history have sought
to stop their advance:

•    During the Industrial Revolution, Dutch workers threw their shoes—sabots—into the machinery
     in an attempt to damage the technology that they believed would take their jobs.
•    Automobiles faced early opposition. When they ﬁrst became available, some cities banned them.
     San Francisco had a law that mandated parking your car at the edge of the city and riding a horse
     or carriage into town.
•    Thomas Edison attempted to use such fear to manipulate the public for his own ﬁnancial beneﬁt.
     With a vested interest in the success of direct current, Edison sought to undermine the use of
     alternating current by holding public demonstrations of its danger by electrocuting animals—
     dogs, cats, horses, even an elephant.
•    “If man were meant to ﬂy…” was a common refrain raised by the fearful and skeptical in
     opposition to commercial aviation.

The same technologies that have brought scientists together—I’m thinking information technology,
in particular—have made our world smaller and have brought more people into the public square,
people driven by their fears and concerns about the technology under development. And not only are
more people involved, they are essentially looking over your shoulder, watching what you are doing
in near real-time.

Seventh Message: The body politic is susceptible to the virus of fear

We also know from history that the body politic is susceptible to the virus of fear. When the public
catches a public-policy cold virus, their elected representatives sneeze. Our democratic institutions
are designed to be responsive to the public. To keep technology moving forward, we must prevent
fear from taking hold among the public.

Eighth Message: We must identify legitimate ethical and societal issues and address them as
soon as possible

So we can’t afford to wait to deal with these things. We need to wrestle with them now.




20                                Nanotechnology: Societal Implications
