                  Pesticides Industry Sales And Usage:
                                1994 and 1995 Market Estimates
                                    Arnold L. Aspelin, Ph. D.*



                                        Introduction
      This report provides an overview of the pesticide industry for 1994 and 1995. It contains a
series of tables with estimates of the U.S. market for those two years. The tables contain information
on quantities used and user expenditures (by economic sector and pesticide class), imports, exports,
numbers of firms/individuals involved in production/use of pesticides, number of pesticides,
certified applicators and on a number of other topics.
      Much of the tabular information in this report is for the years 1994 and 1995, but historical data
are also presented. In a number of cases, the historical estimates of volume used and dollar
expenditures have been updated (reestimated) as presented in tables 13 through 16 in this report.
Care should be taken to use the new values in this report rather than earlier editions. The estimates
of usage are presented for new, more specific categories (types) of usage than in earlier editions of
this report. (See Table 3 column headings and discussion of the new categories in the section titled,
“About This Report”.) Graphic representations of the data are included along with a number of the
tables.




     * Arnold Aspelin is Senior Economic Advisor, Biological and Economic Analysis Division,
Office of Pesticide Programs, EPA. If you have questions regarding this report or need further
information, please contact the author at the following address: BEAD/OPP/EPA (7503W),
401 M Street, SW, Washington, DC            20460—telephone (703) 308-8136 or email:
ASPELIN.ARNOLD@EPAMAIL.EPA.GOV.

Acknowledgments
     The author of this report would like to acknowledge the valuable assistance provided by the
following outside sources:
     ◊ John Wilkin, Marypat Corbett, and Greg Malcom, Doane Marketing Research, St. Louis, MO,
       and Sam Moore, Maritz Marketing Research, St. Louis, MO, (agricultural usage and markets),
     ◊ Phil Calderoni and Sally Landels, SRI Consulting, Menlo Park, CA (non-agricultural and world
       markets for pesticides), and
     ◊ Mancer Cyr and Gillian Morris, Kline & Co., Fairfield, NJ (non-agricultural markets
       and biocide usage).
     Also, recognition is accorded for the efforts of reviewers of the draft versions of this
      report including:
     ◊ Sam Rives, Van Johnson, M. Padgitt, and Jim Smith of USDA; Roger Holtorf, Bob Torla,
       Steve Nako, Art Grube, Ed Brandt, EPA; Steve Wanser, USITC/DOC; Leonard Gianessi,
       National Center for Food and Agricultural Policy; and Dan Francke, DPRA, Manhattan, KS.

                                                                94/95 Pesticides Industry Sales And Usage—1
