                                 2. Introductory and Summary Comments


•    Half of the newly designed advanced materials and manufacturing processes are built using
     control at the nanoscale. Even if this control may be rudimentary as compared to the long-term
     potential of nanotechnology, this will mark a milestone towards the new industrial revolution
     outlined in 2000. By extending the experience with information technology in the 1990s, I
     would estimate an overall increase in productivity of at least 1 percent per year because of
     these changes. Ahead are several challenges. Visualization and numerical simulation of three-
     dimensional domains with nanometer resolution will be necessary for engineering applications.
     Nanoscale-designed catalysts will expand the use in “exact” chemical manufacturing to cut and
     link molecular assemblies with minimal waste. Silicon transistors will reach dimensions smaller
     than 10 nm and will be integrated with molecular or other kind of nanoscale systems (beyond or
     integrated with Complementary Metal-Oxide Semiconductor technology [CMOS]). Changing
     our goals and strategies in this area is the experimental proof of concept, completed in 2003,
     which showed that CMOS can work at 5 nanometer gate lengths (and potentially at a smaller
     scale). One may recall that in 2000, we contemplated the “brick wall” of physical principles that
     would limit the advancement of silicon technology by the end of this decade. Now we are looking
     to advances in CMOS technology over another decade (by 2020) and then to its integration with
     bottom-up molecular assembling.
•    Suffering from chronic illnesses is being sharply reduced. It’s conceivable that by 2015, our ability
     to detect and treat tumors in their ﬁrst year of occurrence might sharply reduce suffering and
     death from cancer. In 2000, we aimed for earlier detection of cancer within 20 to 30 years. Today,
     based on the results obtained during the period 2001 through 2003 with respect to understanding
     the processes within a cell and new instrumentation to characterize those cellular processes, we
     are trying to eliminate cancer as a cause of death if treated in a timely manner. Pharmaceutical
     synthesis, processing, and delivery will be enhanced by nanoscale control, and about half of
     pharmaceuticals will use nanotechnology as a key component. Modeling the brain based on
     neuron-to-neuron interactions will be possible by using advances in nanoscale measurement and
     simulation.
•    Converging technologies from the nanoscale will establish a mainstream pattern for applying
     and integrating nanotechnology with biology, electronics, medicine, learning, and other ﬁelds. It
     includes hybrid manufacturing, neuromorphic engineering, artiﬁcial organs, expansion of the life
     span, and enhanced learning and sensorial capacities. New concepts in distributed manufacturing
     and multi-competency clustering will be developed.
•    Life-cycle sustainability and biocompatibility will be pursued in the development of new
     products. Knowledge development in nanotechnology will lead to reliable safety rules for
     limiting unexpected environmental and health consequences of nanomaterials. Synergism among
     life cycles of various groups of products will be introduced for overall sustainable development.
     Control of nanoparticles will be performed in air, soils, and waters using a national network for
     monitoring and remediation.
•    Knowledge development and education will begin with instruction about the nanoscale instead
     of the microscale. Earlier exposure to nanoscience education could change the role of science
     and enhance motivation for schoolchildren. A new education paradigm not based on disciplines
     but on the unity of nature, and education-research integration will be tested for K-16 (reversing
     the pyramid of learning [8]). Science and education paradigm changes will be at least as
     fundamental as those that occurred during the “microscale S&E transition” that originated in the
     1950s, when microscale analysis and scientiﬁc analysis were stimulated by the space race and
     digital revolution. Stimulated by nanotechnology products, the new “nanoscale S&E transition”



26                                 Nanotechnology: Societal Implications
