                                             2. NNI INVESTMENTS
Budget Summary
The 2010 Budget provides $1.6 billion for the National Nanotechnology Initiative (NNI), reflecting steady
growth in the NNI investment. This sustained major investment in nanotechnology research and
development (R&D) across the Federal Government over the past ten fiscal years of the NNI reflects the
broad support of the Administration and of Congress for this program. This support is based on
nanotechnology’s potential to vastly improve our fundamental understanding and control of matter,
ultimately leading to a revolution in technology and industry for the benefit of society. The NNI remains
focused on fulfilling the Federal role of supporting basic research, infrastructure development, and
technology transfer, in the expectation that the resulting advances and capabilities will make important
contributions to national priorities, with applications across a wide range of industries, including healthcare,
electronics, aeronautics, agriculture and food, and energy. The NNI also is committed to implementing its
comprehensive strategy for environmental, health, and safety (EHS) research. 4 Increasing investments by
NNI participating agencies in nanotechnology-related research since 2001 reflect a recognition of the
potential for this research to support agency missions and responsibilities. The cumulative NNI investment
since 2001, including the 2010 request, now totals almost $12 billion. Cumulative investments in EHS
research since 2005 now total over $350 million. Cumulative investments in education and in research on
ethical, legal, and other societal dimensions of nanotechnology since 2005 total over $220 million.
The 2010 NNI budget supports nanoscale science and engineering R&D at 13 agencies. Agencies with the
largest investments are:
• NSF (fundamental research across all disciplines of science and engineering)
•    DOD (science and engineering research advancing defense and dual-use capabilities)
•    DOE (research providing a basis for new and improved energy technologies)
•    NIH (nanotechnology-based biomedical research at the intersection of life sciences and the physical
     sciences)
•    NIST (fundamental research and development of measurement and fabrication tools, analytical
     methodologies, and metrology for nanotechnology)
Other agencies investing in mission-related research are NASA, NIOSH, EPA, USDA (including both
CSREES and FS), DHS, DOJ, and DOT (including the Federal Highway Administration, FHWA).
Table 2 shows NNI investments in 2008–2010 for Federal agencies with budgets and investments for
nanotechnology R&D. Tables 3–6 list the investments by agency and by program component area (PCA).
The program component areas shown in these tables are those outlined in the December 2007 NNI
Strategic Plan, 5 with nanotechnology-related EHS research reported in a separate PCA.




4
  Strategy for Nanotechnology-Related Environmental, Health, and Safety Research (February 2008):
http://www.nano.gov/NNI_EHS_Research_Strategy.pdf.
5
  http://www.nano.gov/NNI_Strategic_Plan_2007.pdf, pp. 7–9.

              The National Nanotechnology Initiative—Supplement to the President’s 2009 Budget                7
