          up to now needs to be maintained. In particular, on the ﬁscal side continued efforts are
          needed to strengthen measures to prevent arrears accumulations, to further strengthen tax
          administration and to streamline public administration. Given the key role of structural reforms
          in boosting GDP, determined implementation of reforms, especially to reduce rents in the
          non-traded sectors, is also essential for the success of the programme.


        In Ireland, the ﬁfth review of the EU/IMF ﬁnancial assistance programme concluded that the ﬁscal
        outlook for 2012 is in line with the targets (which foresee for 2012 a general government deﬁcit of
        8.6% of GDP). Slightly more than half of the consolidation effort in 2012 relates to expenditure,
        including cuts in government consumption, while on the revenue side the government foresees
        in particular measures related to indirect taxes (e.g. a VAT increase of 2 percentage points) and
        increases in various administered prices. Although ﬁscal risks have increased somewhat as the
        international macroeconomic environment has deteriorated, the government still seems to be
        committed to taking all the necessary measures to meet the deﬁcit targets and bring the general
        government deﬁcit below 3% of GDP by 2015, in line with Ireland’s commitments under the
        excessive deﬁcit procedure. On 26 January 2012 the Irish Fiscal Advisory Council published
        a report on how to best design the ﬁscal rules for Ireland, taking account of the government’s
        Fiscal Responsibility Bill to be introduced in mid-2012, and how to strengthen the Council’s
        independence.

        With the exception of Estonia, Luxembourg and Finland, all euro area countries are currently
        subject to an excessive deﬁcit procedure. On 11 January 2012 the European Commission informed
        the ECOFIN Council that it assessed Belgium, Cyprus and Malta as having taken effective action
        under their respective excessive deﬁcit procedures. According to the Commission’s latest forecasts
        for these countries, Malta is expected to have reduced its deﬁcit to the reference value in 2011 – the
        deadline set for correcting its excessive deﬁcit. In Belgium and Cyprus, the deﬁcits are projected to
        decline to 2.9% and 2.7% of GDP respectively in 2012, which is the deadline for correcting their
        excessive deﬁcits. As a consequence, the ECOFIN Council decided on 24 January 2012 to refrain
        from stepping up these countries’ excessive deﬁcit procedures.

        STEPS TOWARDS A STRONGER FISCAL STABILITY UNION
        On 2 March 2012 all the EU Member States except the United Kingdom and the Czech Republic
        signed a new intergovernmental Treaty on Stability, Coordination and Governance in the
        Economic and Monetary Union. Key elements of the ﬁscal compact, as enshrined in the new
        Treaty, are the obligation of the signatories to achieve and maintain a budgetary position that
        is balanced or in surplus in structural terms, and their obligation to put in place an automatic
        mechanism to take corrective action (see Box 12 entitled “Main elements of the ﬁscal compact”
        for further details). In this regard, developments in the annual structural budget balances of
        the general government sector constitute a key ﬁscal variable for monitoring compliance with
        the new provisions. As these structural balances are derived from cyclically adjusted budget
        balances, net of one-off and temporary measures, the cyclical adjustment is an important part
        of the toolkit for the compliance assessment (see Box 13 entitled “Cyclical adjustment of the
        government budget balance”).




      ECB
      Monthly Bulletin
100   March 2012
