                                 Access to education and training in Europe


3.3.4. Finland

As mentioned above, Finland, like the other Scandinavian countries, is grounded in a
principle of free education. There are no tuition fees for any degree courses at Finnish
Universities, for either home or foreign students, and no plans to introduce them.

In addition, a system of support of financial support is intended to mitigate financial barriers
to higher education. This financial aid comprises study grants, housing supplements and
government guaranteed student loans. The former two are government-funded and paid
monthly to the student’s bank account. Total aid awarded to an individual depends on
personal financial circumstances, as well as the type of school, age and marital status of the
student, and the mode of accommodation.

The housing supplement can cover 80% of the individual’s rent, but will not be available if
rent is less than €58,87 per month and will not be granted for the part of rent that exceeds
€214,44. Student loans are granted by banks operating in Finland and repayment normally
begins on completion of studies. Interest assistance on loan repayment is available to all those
who have a low income and who have not received financial aid for a specified period.22

The link between a robust financial support system and accessibility appears to be borne out
by the high participation rates in Finnish higher education. However, despite this, and the
high standard of the country’s compulsory education sector23, research suggests that access is
still not equitable across socio-economic groups.24

3.4. Results

It is clearly difficult to accurately measure impact of any one single factor on access to higher
education. The systems described above cannot be divorced from underlying differences in
national education systems and wider societal structures. This said, considerable research has
focused on changing patterns of participation following the introduction of tuition fees, both
in individual countries and as cross-country comparators.
Contrary to widespread public belief, the majority of these studies suggest that introducing
tuition fees does not inevitably harm access to HE for individuals from lower socio-economic
groups. “Evidence suggests that introducing tuition has not made a great deal of difference in
the participation rates of under-represented groups. In the UK, the percentage of enrolment of
students from ethnic minority groups increased by 9.7% in 1994-1995 –with no tuition fees-
to 11.5% in 2001-02 -with tuition fees. In Australia, there is no evidence that increasing
tuition discouraged students from participating in university, including those from low-




22
   Student Financial Support: An inventory in 24 European countries, Hans Vossensteyn (2004), Centre for
Higher Education Policy Studies
23
   Finland was placed first in the OECD's 2003 Programme for International Student Assessment (PISA) study of
learning skills among 15-year-olds
24
   See A. Furlong et al (1998) and Statement of National Union of Students in Finland to OECD (2005)
                                                     20
                                  ECOTEC Research and Consulting Ltd
