                                                                     Contract number – REM 01
                                                                                  Final Report

          department). University Complutense de Madrid, Jose Maria Alonso, Director
          of Investigation.
      o   Sweden. Chalmers University of Technology, Ms Erica Sköld.
      o   Switzerland. University of Genève. Ms Jacqueline Riat.
      o   Turkey. Hacettepe University, Istambul Technical University. Administrative
          department.
      o   United Kingdom. University of Bath, Ms Sue Williams, director of Human
          Resources; University of Coventry; The University of Huddersfield, Ms Carol
          Doyle (Research budgets and studentships).

Other additional information, considered useful for the verification of the study data
was collected, mainly using desk-research. The following documents were
downloaded from the Internet (when available), or provided by some contacts:

      o   The retributions of the official personnel in the public universities of Spain in
          20073.

      o   “Complete Results of the SFRI Questionnaire on the Working Conditions of
          Researchers in the Universities and Public Research Organisations” from the
          Directorate for science, technology and industry, Committee for Scientific
          and Technological policy of the OECD, provided by Lynne Hunter (Adviser,
          Delegation of the European Commission in Australia).

      o   “Salary System for Universities – Job demand chart for teaching and
          Research staff”, from the University of Oulu, 16th December 2005.

The results obtained from this verification phase, presented in Annex 6, showed
that in some countries, there was a deviation between the Total yearly salary
obtained in the study and the “real” total yearly salary applied in the institutions
contacted. Thus, an adjustment of the final results was seen as necessary. Taking
into account that the number of responses considered in the verification phase does
not provide the minimum accuracy level demanded in this type of study, and that
the categories of researchers considered do not exactly match the ones considered
in the study sample, the adjustment of the study data should be done by means of
a more reliable source.

At this point different people from the EC and National Ministries of Labour,
Employment and Economy were contacted. Based on this action, it was decided to
take the data of labour costs calculated by Eurostat in 2005 as a reference. Thus,
an adjustment coefficient for each country was defined. That data provided the
real percentage of employer’s charges with respect to the total yearly salary. Those
percentages were compared to the ones obtained from the survey data (percentage
of employer’s charges with respect to the total yearly salary). The adjustment
coefficient represents the difference between both percentages.




3
    http://www.ugr.es/~feteugt/Boletin/Boletin%20FETE%20Universidad%20039.pdf



CARSA                                                                        Page 39 of 211
