                       Access to education and training in Europe: Qualitative Reviews


education in Slovenia and Iceland is available for children aged 1 to 6. On the contrary, the
standard provision is available in Greece, Malta and UK only for a two-year period.

One-year Pre-school Classes

The structure of pre-primary provision in Denmark, Bulgaria, Estonia, Finland, Lithuania,
Poland and Sweden differs from the other countries in a sense that they all provide, as an
additional element to the standard provision, special pre-school classes for children the year
before the start of their compulsory education. This trend is dominant in non-mass
participation countries96 that are characterised by a relative late enrolment age to primary
schools and the availability of a very early provision. The implication of this provision to
access is very clear; it widens participation to the great majority of children in Bulgaria and
Lithuania and makes access universal or nearly universal in other countries.

In Poland and Bulgaria the attendance to these classes has recently become mandatory, while
participation remains voluntary in the others. These classes are often organised in a primary
school setting, while the other form of pre-primary institutions in these countries tend to
function in non-school settings. Supply of pre-school establishments in primary school
premises is also fairly common in Belgium and Slovenia.

Home Based Care Services and Education Programmes

To ensure access to children from remote villages and towns, some countries have started to
run 'mobile' pre-school education units (e.g. France, Portugal and Spain). The most common
forms are visiting teacher and home educational activity schemes. The Itinerant Child
Education is a form of pre-primary education in Portugal for children between 3 and 5 years
of age in isolated rural areas, where it is difficult to gather a group of children to create a
nursery school97. This service is organised by a teacher who goes to various places (e.g.
community centres) or directly to the families on a daily basis. This type of provision in
Portugal is the responsibility of the Regional Education Boards (DRE).

Municipalities in the Nordic countries, principally in Denmark, Finland and Sweden, also
provide additional family day-care provisions (besides the traditional form of kindergartens
and pre-school classes in primary school settings). The family day-care involves municipal
pre-school teachers providing care in private homes for children from several families.
Similar home-care provision also exists in Austria, although not to the same extent than in the
Nordic countries, as the educational level of care-takers is lower. In Austria, so-called 'day
parents' mainly look after children in their own private homes, usually in addition to their own
children. However, this form of provision has strongly gained in significance in recent years
due to the increasing childcare demand as well as improving qualifications levels of 'day
parents'.




96
     Excluding Estonia, Denmark and Sweden.
97
     Minimum pre-school group size is 15.
                                                     12
                                   ECOTEC Research and Consulting Ltd
