                      Access to education and training in Europe: Qualitative Reviews


that in practice it has also increased educational inequalities –since it is being accessed to a
relatively large extent by people who already has tertiary education qualifications.

2.5.     Entitlements and obligations

Admission requirements

Within Europe there is considerable variation in the requirements for access to higher
education. In most countries a school leaving diploma forms the basic requirement for entry
into higher education but many states have systems to restrict the numbers of students
admitted by imposing quotas usually termed a numerus clausus. If demand exceeds the
number of places available, places are allocated by means of a draw or, if the institution so
wishes, it may select students itself. The UK is regarded as being at one end of this spectrum
having a highly selective system with fixed numbers for every course and different levels of
additional selection procedures146. Sweden also has a numerus clausus for all higher
education with selection for admission. However, both the UK and Sweden have well-
developed alternative routes into higher education. At the other extreme are countries in
which the secondary school leaving certificate guarantees admission to higher/tertiary
education institutions (though not necessarily to a specific institution for a specific course).
This right, which is enshrined in law, is based on the concept that maturity implies academic
aptitude. Such countries include, Austria, Belgium, France, Germany, Italy (with some
restrictions) and the Netherlands. France, however, also has the highly selective grandes
écoles, which admit students only on the basis of highly competitive examinations. In France
there is also a separate examination for admission to medicine. In some countries, too, (for
instance, Germany and the Netherlands) there are different types of high school and some
certificates may provide admission to university and others only to non-university tertiary
education institutions. In several countries where there is non-selective entry (such as France
and Italy) a high proportion of students fail to complete successfully the first stage of their
study in tertiary education. Whereas drop-outs are normally considered a sign of inefficiency
of the education and training system, at the same time they mean that those who have dropped
out have had access to some kind of tertiary education, which is better than them having had
no access at all to it.

In between, there are countries such as Greece, Portugal and Spain (and many Central and
Eastern European countries) where, in addition to the possession of the secondary school
leaving certificate, students traditionally had to take either a national university entrance
examination or examinations conducted by individual universities. The university place
offered may be determined by the state on the basis of the student’s performance in the
national examination. In Spain there a number of private universities, the oldest being those
associated with the roma Catholic Church. Admission to these is by competitive examination
and selection is more intense than in the state universities. In Greece only one in three
successful students in the university entrance exam is offered a place, which accounts for the
great mobility of Greek students within the EU. In Portugal the places available for entrance

146
  See also: Higher education in the learning society, National Committee of Inquiry into Higher Education
(NCIHE), 1997.
                                                     40
                                   ECOTEC Research and Consulting Ltd
