                                                                                                                         ECONOMIC
                                                                                                                     AND MONETARY
                                                                                                                     DEVELOPMENTS

                                                                                                                                Output,
                                                                                                                       demand and the
                                                                                                                         labour market




at a level below its long-term average. The availability of ﬁnancing has remained tight, dampening
productive capital formation. While survey data on industrial conﬁdence, such as the manufacturing
PMI and its new orders component, showed some improvement in January and February 2012,
the levels recorded still point to a contraction in the sector. Although the outlook for construction
investment is slightly more favourable for the ﬁrst quarter of 2012 than for the previous quarter,
activity is still expected to be subdued owing to gradual adjustments in those regions where it had
expanded extraordinarily in the pre-crisis period. Survey data also point to subdued activity in
the sector.

Non-construction investment is expected to strengthen modestly during the course of 2012 in
line with a gradual recovery in overall economic activity. More limited growth is envisaged for
construction investment. There are downside risks to the outlook, and uncertainty is high.

GOVERNMENT CONSUMPTION
Recently growth in government consumption has been moderate, reﬂecting ﬁscal consolidation
efforts in a number of countries. Following a slight quarter-on-quarter decline in the third quarter of
2011, real government consumption continued to decline in the fourth quarter.

Looking at individual components, restraint in compensation of government employees, which
accounts for close to half of total government consumption, has been a major dampening force on
total nominal government consumption. This restraint stems from moderate wage developments and
employment reductions in several countries. Intermediate government consumption expenditure
(which accounts for slightly less than a quarter of the total) has also been declining, owing to
the ongoing consolidation efforts of governments. Social transfers in kind, which also account
for almost a quarter of government consumption, have been growing more in line with historical
averages. This is because social transfers in kind include items such as health expenditure, which
have a somewhat autonomous dynamic.

Looking ahead, the impetus to domestic demand from government consumption is expected to
remain limited in the coming quarters as a result of further ﬁscal consolidation efforts expected in a
number of euro area countries.

INVENTORIES
The pronounced inventory depletion that accompanied the deep recession of 2008 and 2009 and
the subsequent partial replenishment thereof during the recovery left producers with fairly lean
inventories. Nevertheless, the slowdown in activity still required some reduction in the pace of net
restocking observed in early 2011, with signiﬁcant negative contributions of inventories to growth
occurring in the second half of 2011.

The restocking reported in the national accounts since the third quarter of 2010 was probably more
a reﬂection of the stronger than anticipated recovery in activity, rather than a deliberate attempt
by ﬁrms to relax the tight inventory policies that had been gradually put in place, notably after
the bankruptcy of Lehman Brothers. Indeed, surveys and other anecdotal evidence tend to point
towards tightly managed inventories along the supply chain from 2010 to mid-2011. Nonetheless,
the conjunction of substantial net additions of inventories observed in mid-2011 (0.7% of GDP
in value in the second quarter of 2011) and the marked deterioration in business perspectives in
summer 2011 led ﬁrms to swiftly reassess inventory levels in a matter of a few months. According
to the European Commission’s business surveys, these levels are now considered to be close to
the norm. Indeed, the balance of assessment (as to whether inventories are above, below or close

                                                                                                         ECB
                                                                                             Monthly Bulletin
                                                                                                 March 2012     79
