                      Access to education and training in Europe: Qualitative Reviews


For most of the countries that provide education by distance learning, most of the
programmes are offering academically-related courses, but for example, in Greece and
Finland there is also the opportunity to study vocationally-related courses through distance
learning. In Greece, from 1992, the Organisation for Vocational Education and Training
(OEEK) launched an effort to provide distance vocational training. At present, work has
begun under the Second Community Support Framework on creating a separate agency, a
Distance Training Institute, with cooperation between the Ministry of National Education and
Religious Affairs and OEEK. Open university education in Finland is provided by continuing
education centres, other university organisations and various adult education institutions.
Vocational specialisation studies are large-scale programs for further education training,
based on polytechnic degrees. Open polytechnics have been around since 1997, and all
polytechnics present this opportunity. The studies conducted there are the same studies that
are included in the polytechnic degree programme. In 2004 approximately 11,000 students
attended open polytechnics.
Countries that have little provision of distance learning include Hungary, Poland and
Slovenia. For example, there is a lack of alternative training institutions, such as an open
university system, in Hungarian higher education. The development of non-traditional
training programmes within state institutions began after 1995, mostly through PHARE
support, and from the late 1990s, several internet-based 'universities' began to be organised,
yet they are still at a too early stage of development to impact upon the delivery of traditional
higher education.

As mentioned in the introduction to this section, continuing education is another way to
deliver tertiary education. Two countries that have dedicated systems for this type of delivery
include the UK and Finland. In the UK, University for Industry (UfI) is an initiative launched
by the Government to play a key role in its strategy for lifelong learning. The UfI acts as a
broker helping people and businesses to identify their learning needs and to access this
learning in the appropriate form. It aims to break down barriers to learning by making
provision more flexible and accessible. It promotes learning ranging from basic skills of
literacy and numeracy to specialised technological skills and business management. Many
higher education institutions offer extra-mural courses that are specifically intended to meet
the needs of local communities. Consequently, they may offer part-time courses providing
professional updating, which people attend on day-release from work or attend in the evening,
or leisure courses on subjects such as local history or geography, or language or literature
classes. In Finland, adult education provided by universities is mainly arranged at
universities’ continuing education centres. The main aim of continuing education is to
provide academically educated people with an opportunity to update their knowledge and
skills or to acquire new professional skills or qualifications145.

We have seen therefore that tertiary education distance learning has the potential to increase
access, and there are hopes that it helps to reach people from less privileged backgrounds and
with lower previous educational attainment, rural areas and working people but we also see


145
   Spain also has a strong Open University system (made of two Open Universities), which is described in more
detail in the project’s case-studies.
                                                     39
                                   ECOTEC Research and Consulting Ltd
