                        Access to education and training in Europe: Qualitative Reviews


and are bound by rather rigid qualification and remuneration systems”162. Similarly, in
Denmark there have been calls for greater flexibility and a system that relies less on the
formal education system for information on the availability of skills among the labour
force163. In order for such a transformation to take place, employers need to change their
recruitment and promotion procedures, and other stakeholders in the labour market adjust the
requirements for membership of professional bodies. The social partners thus need to shape
the labour market in recognition of and such as to accommodate the increasing need for
lifelong learning.

In sum, it is evident that developments in the role of social partners in general and employers
in particular, are very different across the countries under review. However, the differences
are not limited to the level of responsibility of employers and social partners in shaping adult
education and training opportunities, but also in the nature and form that the responsibility
takes. As noted by the OECD (2003), “collective bargaining is occurring to various extents
and at varying levels in OECD countries”.

Individual Adult/Employee

As with the responsibilities and roles of the public sector and social partners, the manner in
which responsibility may fall on the individual adult may take a number of different forms.
Hence, while there is little evidence that workers co-finance training through wage cuts, there
is evidence from several countries suggesting that individual employees contribute with their
time, i.e. training may take place outside of normal working hours. For example, research has
shown that 20% of the in-service training volume in Germany is organised outside working
hours. Moreover, in 55% of all firms in German private industry, employees use leisure time
for continuing education and training164. With growing requirements for skill acquisition and
renewal, the responsibility of individual employees is likely to increase in the future.
However, it is of interest to note that the extent to which this individual responsibility and
investment is publicly supported or subsidised, differs greatly between countries (see section
on entitlements below).

Moreover, with the emergence of self-directed learning and distance-learning opportunities,
these new avenues of learning are emphasised in adult education and training strategies across
the countries under review. This means that individual adults can increasingly take
responsibility for their own learning trajectories, and access education and training
opportunities more easily. With further developments in ICT as a new learning tool there are,
potentially, significant effects on the freedom and responsibility of individual adults to pursue
education and training activities. However, the extent to which these opportunities are being
utilised differs significantly across countries. This is in part reflected in data on the
participation in self-learning activities (see below). It is evident from the data below that the
differences between member states in the use of these new means of learning are greater than
the differences in use of traditional adult education and training.

162
    Nyhan et al, 2003, p. 75
163
    Tørnæs et al, 2004
164
    OECD, 2003
                                                      60
                                    ECOTEC Research and Consulting Ltd
