                                                                                                                                                    ECONOMIC
                                                                                                                                                AND MONETARY
                                                                                                                                                DEVELOPMENTS

                                                                                                                                                         Prices
                                                                                                                                                      and costs




of the recession employment in most euro area countries proved rather resilient, notably as
a result of the strong fall in hours worked and the implied labour hoarding. Nonetheless, the
severity and persistence of the recession ultimately led to a fall in employment and a sharp rise
in unemployment. During the subsequent recovery period there has been a moderate pick-up
in employment growth, owing partly to labour hoarding, while unemployment has remained at
high levels. Wages have adjusted somewhat, although this appears to be due to the stronger
downward adjustment in the variable component of wages (i.e. bonuses, overtime payments, etc.)
rather than to negotiated wages. Overall, the most recent labour market developments in the
euro area seem to be back in line with the historical pattern. There is, however, a high degree
of diversity in labour market adjustment across the euro area countries, largely reﬂecting
differences in the degree of labour market ﬂexibility and progress being made on structural
reforms. Wage moderation and measures to enhance labour market ﬂexibility are essential
to support employment, particularly in those euro area countries experiencing high levels
of unemployment.

Labour market typically adjusts to changes in GDP growth

If aggregate demand in the economy falls, companies usually adjust their production ﬁrst,
followed by the number of hours worked and, ﬁnally, the size of their workforce. There may
be several reasons why companies do not immediately adjust the number of hours worked to
the lower level of production. Initially they may perceive the fall in demand as temporary and,
furthermore, it takes time to plan how to utilise the existing workforce in the new situation.
Once it becomes evident that the downturn has set in, companies adjust the number of hours
worked. This is usually done without adjusting the number of employees, so that only average
working hours are reduced. Only as a last resort do companies cut the number of employees in
response to the lower level of demand. In general, employment in the euro area normally adjusts
to changes in production after one to two quarters, although labour hoarding can mean that it
takes longer, depending on how employers perceive the nature and duration of the downturn,
as well as the need to retain skilled labour.

Labour market adjustment since the 2008-09 recession

At the beginning of the 2008-09 recession employment in most euro area countries proved rather
resilient, notably as a result of the strong adjustment in hours worked.2 However, the severity
and persistence of the recession ultimately led to a fall in employment and a considerable rise in
unemployment.3 Charts A and B show the labour market adjustment in terms of unemployment
and employment since 1996. From the very start of the recession, the relationship between
labour market developments and economic activity appeared to diverge from its normal pattern.4
In particular, GDP growth fell sharply, but unemployment (employment) did not increase
(decrease) as much as would have been expected on the basis of historical regularities, suggesting
that some labour hoarding occurred. Recently, however, the relationship seems to be back in line
with normal historical experience.
2 Policy measures encouraging ﬂexible working time arrangements, namely short-time working schemes, were used as a way of
  containing the impact of the recession on employment.
3 There was nevertheless considerable heterogeneity across the euro area countries. For example, in Germany, unemployment actually
  declined during the crisis, partly as a result of past labour market reforms, e.g. the Hartz reforms.
4 This was also discussed in the box entitled “Back to Okun’s Law? Recent developments in euro area output and unemployment”,
  Monthly Bulletin, ECB, June 2011.




                                                                                                                                    ECB
                                                                                                                        Monthly Bulletin
                                                                                                                            March 2012     67
