                                                                  Porcine brucellosis (Brucella suis)



ASSESSMENT

1.     Introduction - Approach for this Mandate

The mandate for this scientific assessment focuses on Brucella (B.) suis as hazard is addressed
in the following steps. A brief description of the hazard is given with emphasis on aspects
relevant for a qualitative risk assessment of the current situation of B. suis in the European
Union (EU) Member States (MS) (Chapter 2). This is to address the 1st ToR on the relevance
of B. suis in the EU. The epidemiology of B. suis is described in terms of geographical
occurrence, the role of wildlife and routes of transmission under acknowledgment of
uncertainties arising from incomplete scientific information (Chapter 3). The pathogenesis
(Chapter 4), clinical signs (Chapter 5) and diagnostic tools (Chapter 6) are a summary, again
with emphasis on aspects relevant for the risk assessment. A systematic review of available
scientific data on the diagnostic performance of tests for B. suis in pigs along with a statistical
meta-analysis of the diagnostic sensitivity and specificity has been conducted by the working
group and it is reported in the document (Chapter 7). Chapters 6 and 7 address the 4th ToR on
the suitability of tests. Risk pathways for the hazard of concern have been elaborated using
expert knowledge available in the working group. In relation to these pathways, risk factors
have been identified and assessed qualitatively (Chapter 8). Despite the qualitative approach,
efforts were made to capture variability (e.g. due to different epidemiological situations
encountered in MS) and uncertainty (e.g. as evident from scores elicited independently from
the experts) of this assessment. The results of the qualitative risk assessment address the 2nd
ToR on risk factors for introduction and spread of the hazard. Finally, conclusions will be
drawn from material presented in various Chapters to assess the potential value of control
options (Chapter 9). These science-based conclusions will address the 3rd ToR on the
appropriateness of current measures, different elements and possible strategies. For the
purpose of this Opinion, a case definition of Brucellosis for domestic or wild pig (Sus scrofa)
populations has been adopted by the WG, which is further elaborated in Chapter 8.

2.     Description of the causative agent (B. suis)

Hutyra as early as 1909 isolated a species of Brucella from foetuses of aborting sows in
Hungary (Huddleson, 1929). The agent was also isolated from aborted porcine foetuses in the
USA in 1914 (Traum, 1914). For many years it has been thought to be caused by an
exceptionally pathogenic form of Brucella abortus (Alton, 1990). In 1929, Brucella suis was
nominated as a separate species (Huddleson, 1929). To date (June 2009), there are five
recognised biovars of B. suis (1-5) (OIE, 2008a).

2.1.      Morphology (and biovars)
Brucella organisms are Gram negative, coccobacilli, usually arranged singly, but they may be
in pairs or small groups. The length varies from 0.6 m to 1.5 m and the width from 0.5 m
to 0.7 m. The morphology is fairly constant and pleomorphic forms are rare except in old
cultures. The disease caused by biovars 1 and 3 is similar, while that caused by biovar 2
differs from the others in its host range and pathogenicity. Biovar 2 is very rarely pathogenic
for humans, whereas biovars 1 and 3 are highly pathogenic causing severe disease (Alton,
1990; OIE, 2008a). These three biovars usually occur in nature in the smooth form.


                                                               The EFSA Journal (2009) 1144, 12-112
