                                  Access to education and training in Europe



4.     IMMIGRANTS IN DENMARK

By Ann-Marie Nevala, ECOTEC Research and Consulting

4.1. Introduction

Immigrants to the EU and their descendants constitute a growing proportion of the EU
population, particularly in the old-EU15 member states. It is widely recognised that the
increase in the number of immigrants and descendants of working age can have a positive
effect on the European economy if they have an employment rate corresponding to that of
native residents. Integration has become particularly hot topic in the face of political pressure
and labour market challenges caused by the ageing population and low fertility rates.

Numerous studies have demonstrated educational attainment is a crucial element in the labour
market integration of immigrants. The discrepancy in the educational attainment of non-
Western immigrants and natives, however, remains significant; at the same time the number
of low skilled immigrants is on increase. Improving access to education for this group can
also eliminate wider societal inequalities.

This case study presents two main arguments. First, it assesses one national policy approach
in substantial detail, the Danish Integration agreement that was signed in 2002. This tripartite
agreement includes a number of different provisions that aim to improve integration,
especially training and labour market integration, of immigrants. The agreement established
several key policy tools to facilitate the integration process, including tools to improve access
to language courses, work placements and vocational adult training courses for newly arrived
immigrants. Second, the case study includes a European comparative discussion of the way
in which access to higher education is shaped by different national education contexts among
second-generation immigrants. This second part looks in particular at ways in which early
childhood education and compulsory schooling systems in different countries directly affect
the access to HE for this target group.

4.2.      Danish Integration Agreement

4.2.1. Setting the Agenda

Denmark cannot be described as an immigrant country in historical terms. It has only been in
recent decades that the number of refugees and immigrants entering the country has increased.
In 1980 29 immigrants and descendents30 accounted for 3% of the population, whereas in 2004



29
   Ministreriet for Flygtninge, Indvandrere og Integration: Årbog om udlændinge i Danmark 2004 – Status og
udviklong.
30
   A person is defined as a Dane if at least one of his parents is both a Danish national and was born in Denmark.
It is therefore of no significance whether the person himself is a Danish national or was born in Denmark. If the
person is not a Dane, he is an immigrant if he was born abroad, and a descendant if he was born in Denmark.
                                                        24
                                    ECOTEC Research and Consulting Ltd
