                                                                        Porcine brucellosis (Brucella suis)


1.2.5. Porcine semen
Moreover, Council Directive 90/429/EEC of 26 June 1990 laying down the animal health
requirements applicable to intra-Community trade in and imports of semen of domestic
animals of the porcine species9 establishes compulsory testing schemes for donor boars with
respect to porcine brucellosis in the semen collection centres. Testing methods should be
assessed taking into account new technical developments.

TERMS OF REFERENCE AS PROVIDED BY THE EUROPEAN COMMISSION (DG HEALTH AND
CONSUMER PROTECTION)
In view of the above, and in accordance with Article 29 of Regulation (EC) 178/2002 and
Article 20(2) of Regulation (EC) No 854/2004 of the European Parliament and of the Council
of 29 April 2004 laying down specific rules for the organisation of official controls on
products of animal origin intended for human consumption, the Commission asks EFSA to
provide scientific advice on:
            the significance of the presence, origin and occurrence of brucellosis in pigs (Brucella
            suis) in the EU for a better understanding of the impact of the disease in the context of
            the new epidemiological situation;
            the risk of porcine brucellosis (Brucella suis) being introduced into domestic pig
            herds, in particular through movement of and trade in pigs and contact with wildlife;
            and assessment of the risk factors for such introduction and spread of the disease;
            the appropriateness of the current measures, different elements and possible strategies
            that can be used to control and fight against brucellosis in pigs (Brucella suis);
            the suitability of available tests for porcine brucellosis (Brucella suis).

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The European Food Safety Authority (EFSA) wishes to thank the members of the Working
Group for the preparation of this opinion: Matthias Greiner (chair), Mo Salman (rapporteur),
Martin Wierup, Mariano Domingo, José Maria Blasco, Johannes Fiedler, Bruno Garin-
Bastuji, Boiko Likov (invited expert), Falk Melzer, Heinrich Neubauer, Julie Ross (invited
expert), Mirzet Sabirovic, Krzysztof Szulowsky, Manuela Tittarelli, Yolanda Vaz.
The scientific co-ordination for this Scientific Opinion has been undertaken by the EFSA
AHAW Panel Scientific Officers Fabrizio De Massis and Per Have. Didier Verloo from the
EFSA Assessment Metodology Unit (AMU) collaborated in the meta-analysis.

EFSA would like also to thank Kaido Kroon, DG Health and Consumer Protection, Unit D1 –
Animal Health and Standing Committees, Traces Sector, for the collaboration provided for
TRACES data used in this Opinion.




9
    OJ L 224, 18 .X. 1990, p. 62-72


                                                                    The EFSA Journal (2009) 1144, 11-112
