                      ANALYSIS OF THE STAKEHOLDER CONSULTATION ON



    “Science and Technology, the key to Europe’s future: guidelines for future European policy
                              to support research” COM(353)2004


                          DG Research, European Commission, 10 December 2004




                                                    MAIN MESSAGES

An online consultation on the Commission Communication “Science and Technology, the key to
Europe’s future – Guidelines for future European Union policy to support research”,
COM(353)2004, was open to all interested organisations and individuals to participate in between
30 July and 15 October 2004. Over 1700 organisations and individuals from across Europe and
other countries, and including universities, large companies, SMEs, associations and government
bodies responded to the consultation.

Major findings from the analysis of the responses are the following.

There is very strong support 1 (over 97% of responses) for the need to strengthen support for
research at the European level (see table below). Furthermore, there is strong agreement that this
would have an important impact on Europe’s research capacities and capabilities (over 95% of
responses) and that this would contribute significantly to Europe’s competitiveness, social welfare
and sustainability (over 92% of responses).

There is strong support for the 6 major objectives (over 80% of responses for all objectives)
set out in the Commission Communication (see table below). Support is particularly strong to
make Europe more attractive to the best researchers (over 95% of responses) and supporting
transnational collaborative research (over 90% of responses). These actions are established ones
with proven European value added. However, there is also widespread support for the new
objectives to launch European Technology Initiatives (86% of responses) and to stimulate the
creativity of basic research (81% of responses). Concerning the development of infrastructures of
European interest and the coordination of national programmes, the support was high (86% and
85% of responses respectively).

Concerning other aspects for future European support to research, there is a particularly high
importance attached to improving science and society relations (92% of responses); to supporting
innovation (88% of responses) to support to research by and for SMEs (88% of responses); and the
importance of focusing EU efforts on topics of major European interest (88% of responses).


1
    Percentage of responses rating the objective as either “very important” or “important”.

                                                              1
