                                      STAFF REGULATIONS - Annex II


     Annex II: Composition and procedure of the bodies provided for in Article 9 of the Staff
                                        Regulations

                                          Section 1: Staff Committee
                                               Article 1 (8) (75) (96)
The Staff Committee shall comprise the members thereof, together with their alternates if any, whose term of
office shall be three years. The institution may, however, decide to fix a shorter term of office, which may not
be less than one year. Every official of the institution shall be entitled to vote and stand for election.
The conditions for election to the Staff Committee if it is not organised in local sections, or to the local section,
if the Staff Committee is organised in local sections, shall be laid down by the general meeting of officials of the
institution in service at the relevant place of employment. However, the institution may decide that the
conditions for election are to be determined in accordance with the preference of the staff of the institution as
expressed in a referendum. Election shall be by secret ballot.
If the Staff Committee is organised in local sections, the manner in which the members of the Central
Committee are appointed for each place of employment shall be laid down by the general meeting of officials of
the institution in service at the relevant place of employment. Only members of the local section concerned may
be appointed members of the Central Committee.
Membership of the Staff Committee if it is not organised in local sections, or of the local section if the Staff
Committee is organised in local sections shall be such as to ensure the representation of both function groups
provided for in Article 5 of the Staff Regulations and also of the servants referred to in the first paragraph of
Article 7 of the Conditions of employment of other servants of the Communities. The Central Committee of a
Staff Committee organised in local sections shall be validly constituted upon appointment of a majority of its
members.
Elections to the Staff Committee if it is not organised in local sections, or to the local section if the Staff
Committee is organised in local sections, shall be valid only if two thirds of the officials entitled to vote take
part. However, if this proportion is not attained, the second vote shall be valid if the majority of those entitled
take part.
The duties undertaken by members of the Staff Committee and by officials appointed by the Committee to
organs set up under the Staff Regulations or by the institution shall be deemed to be part of their normal service
in their institution. The fact of performing such duties shall in no way be prejudicial to the person concerned.


                                          Section 2: Joint Committee
                                                   Article 2 (69)
The Joint Committee or Committees of an institution shall consist of :
– a chairman appointed each year by the appointing authority,
– members and alternates appointed at the same time in equal numbers by the appointing authority and by the
  Staff Committee.
The common Joint Committee for two or more institutions shall consist of :
– a chairman appointed by the appointing authority referred to in the third subparagraph of Article 2 of the
  Staff Regulations,
– members and alternates appointed in equal numbers by the appointing authorities of the institutions
  represented on the common Joint Committee and by the Staff Committees.
The procedures for instituting the common Joint Committee shall be adopted by agreement between the
institutions represented on the common Joint Committee, after consulting their Staff Committee.
An alternate shall vote only in the absence of a member.




                                                      I - 46
