                                 Access to education and training in Europe


income backgrounds.”25 Similar studies (Vossensteyn: 2001) have found that financial
incentives do not have a major impact on enrolment patterns in the Netherlands.

Equally, ‘a recent report by the Irish Department of Education and Science indicates that the
introduction of the free fees initiative in 1995 had ‘little or no impact to date on promoting
equity and broadening access to higher education for the lowest socio-economic groups’.
While all socio-economic groups experienced actual increases in participation between 1991
and 2001, within the University sector, ‘the lower socio-economic groups represented an even
smaller proportion of entrants in 2001 than they did in 1995.’’26

This may be because fees are only a small part of the total cost of attending HE –which, in
turn, is only one of the factors affecting access to HE, as reviewed in the our main report. A
study by the Educational Policy Institute in Washington look at wider costs of HE and
demonstrated that the link between fees, affordability and access is far from straightforward.27
This study analysed data relating to higher education, ranking countries according to
accessibility and affordability. While recognising that there are many different interpretations
of ‘accessible’ and ‘affordable’ the paper justifies its selection of six measures of affordability
and four for accessibility.

The affordability measures, weighted to reflect relative importance, relate to education costs
(including tuition, books and other necessary materials), living costs, grants, loans and tax
expenditure. They are all expressed as ‘ability to pay’, which is based on GDP, in order to
take account of international variations in income. Unsurprisingly, the free provision and
generous financial aid typical of Scandinavian countries place Sweden and Finland at the top.
Perhaps more surprisingly, the Netherlands is ranked as the third most ‘affordable’ despite its
tradition of tuition fees. This can be explained, however, by the fact that fees are fairly small
and living costs relatively low in relation to the amounts offered through grants and loans.
The Netherlands comes higher than three ‘free’ tuition countries – Germany, France and
Ireland – that show high registration fees and high costs for educational materials.
The message portrayed by this study is clear; affordability is not determined by tuition fees
alone.’

It is also interesting to look at accessibility, which the Global Higher Education Rankings
determined through the following four (weighted) indicators: participation rates; attainment
rates; educational equity index (EEI); and gender parity index (GPI). EEI is an estimate of
educational inequality that measures the degree to which students from high socio-economic
status backgrounds (as measured by parental education levels) are over-represented in higher




25
   Changes in Tuition Policy: Natural Policy Experiments in Five Countries, Watson Scott Swail, Ed. D. and
Donald E. Heller, (2004) Educational Policy Institute (Canada)
26
   Tuition Policies in a Comparative Perspective: Theoretical and Political Rationales, Pamela N Marcucci and
D. Bruce Jonhstone.
27
   Global Higher Education Rankings: Affordability and Accessibility in Comparative Perspective (2005),
Educational Policy Institute
                                                      21
                                   ECOTEC Research and Consulting Ltd
