                        Access to education and training in Europe: Qualitative Reviews


for lifelong learning, focussing on children's holistic development and giving them a solid
grounding for learning throughout their lives. For example, at the end of the 1990s, 12 OECD
countries participated in a programme "Making lifelong learning a reality for all". Within this
programme the ministers of these countries highlighted the high priority of the aim of
improving access to, and quality of, early childhood education in partnership with families. It
was significant that the ministers did recognise the importance of strengthening the
foundations of lifelong learning starting in the early childhood years. Particularly, the
assumed role of childcare and pre-school education in preparing children from socio-
economically disadvantaged families for formal schooling in primary school is high on many
national policy agendas.

Making use of national reviews on education by UNESCO79 and Eurydice80, this chapter
focuses on discussing and reviewing the rate and extent of access to education-oriented pre-
primary institutions. The chapter is structured as follows. Section 2 provides information on
the participation rates in the study countries, and aims to classify them according to the level
of access. Section 3 outlines the responsibilities of different stakeholders towards making pre-
primary education accessible for all. Section 4 discusses the main features of the pre-primary
education structures in the study countries. Section 5 outlines criteria for access to pre-
primary education, entitlements and obligations regarding pre-primary provisions, and also
discusses provisions for specific disadvantaged groups. Section 6 reviews the main barriers to
the take-up of educational opportunities for children in the target age-group for pre-primary
education institutions and also discusses different provisions to reduce inequalities in access,
and different methods to improve access levels. Section 7 discusses key findings and trends.
The final section summarises findings and provides an overall assessment of access to pre-
primary education in the countries under review.

1.2.      Participation in Pre-primary Education

Pre-primary education is available at three years old (or earlier) in almost all the study
countries. As displayed in the table 8.1, in most countries participation by four-year-old
children is the norm or is rapidly developing, despite the fact that attendance is in most
countries voluntary. When looking at the average participation rate of pre-school education81,
the countries covered by this study can be clustered around four groups:

A) Universal access
Belgium, France, Italy and Spain display a situation where children under compulsory
schooling age have a universal access to pre-primary education. In fact, in Belgium, France
and Italy more than 90 % of children attend pre-school already at the age of three.



79
   UNESCO (International Bureau of Education): World Data on Education. 2003.
80
   Eurybase; Structures of education, vocational training and adult education systems in Europe; and National
summary sheets on education systems in Europe and ongoing reforms
81
   Refers to the participation rates from the age of three until the age of compulsory schooling in the country. In
some countries pre-school provision is available for younger children, however, comparable data is only
available from the age of three.
                                                         2
                                     ECOTEC Research and Consulting Ltd
