                      Access to education and training in Europe: Qualitative Reviews


countries may be regarded as a continuum ranging from exclusively grants-based systems to
exclusively loans-based systems such as the one in Iceland. According to the EURYDICE
grants are the most widespread form of support, but many countries also offer loans that are
guaranteed and/or subsidised by the State150.

In most countries in which loans are obtainable, they form an integral part of support and,
together with grants, constitute a combined system of financial support. The two components
are usually awarded depending on similar requirements, and only students entitled to a
measure of support in the form of a grant may acquire a loan in order to supplement it. In
most combined systems, students are generally free to decide whether they will accept the
supplementary loan entitlement. An exception to this is in Germany where students eligible
for financial assistance were obliged to receive a non-repayable grant and an interest free loan
in equivalent proportions regarded as an integral support package. Repayment terms for this
state loan depends on social considerations and income. Since 2001, a maximum of 10.000
Euro had to be repaid. Once the maximum period during which assistance is payable has been
exceeded, students, as a rule, only receive funding in the form of a bank loan, which is subject
to payment of interests.

In some countries, however, the systems of grants and loans are separate and operate
independently of each other. The conditions governing their award may also be different.
Students not entitled to a grant may be eligible for a loan. In France, where the loans system is
separate, students entitled to a grant cannot obtain the loan known as a prêt d’honneur. In the
Flemish Community of Belgium, Greece, Spain, Ireland, Austria and Portugal, only grants
were available in the 1990s. In general it can be stated that countries in the north-west of
Europe have a mix of grants and loans, whereas the financial support for students in the
south-western countries of Europe mainly or exclusively rely on grants. In eastern Europe
participation in higher education is financially supported by scholarships and various forms of
social allowances, although this is often limited to enrolment in public funded institutions. In
Poland, in order to make higher education accessible to higher number of young people, the
system of financial support to students from the state budget has been introduced. In Hungary
the most general form of support is an academic scholarship that differentiates and allocates
state support essentially on the basis of the academic performance of the individual student.

In general financial support systems for students can be said to enhance the access to higher
education by securing equality of (financial) opportunities regarding the right to education.
For instance, in Spain the State has established a general scholarship and aid system charged
to its General Budget in order to remove the socio-economic obstacles. Economic
requirements tend to secure that these benefits will be granted to those students who do not
have enough family income in order to meet the education expenses of their members. In
Finland the purpose of the student financial aid is to guarantee equal opportunities in
education by securing the students’ income. In Ireland the universities are working with so
called “access” schemes explicitly meant to promote educational opportunity for students

150
  Key topics in education. Volume 1: Financial support for students in higher education in Europe,
EURYDICE, 1999.


                                                      43
                                   ECOTEC Research and Consulting Ltd
