         affected consumer conﬁdence, while private          Contemporaneous correlation between
                                                             consumer confidence and real private
         consumption growth was rather stable.               consumption growth
         Thereafter, the correlation between the two
                                                                                  in year-on-year       in quarter-on-quarter
         variables increased markedly to a level
                                                                                            terms                      terms
         above the historical average. This may reﬂect
                                                             Germany                           0.34                         0.18
         structural changes in the relationship between      Spain                             0.75                         0.70
         the two variables. This is also suggested by        France                            0.63                         0.37
                                                             Italy                             0.60                         0.38
         robustness checks on estimated parameters
                                                             Euro area                         0.72                         0.49
         of simple regressions of private consumption
                                                             Sources: European Commission, Eurostat and ECB calculations.
         growth (both in year-on-year terms and quarter-     Notes: The data refer to the period from the ﬁrst quarter of 1985
                                                             to the fourth quarter of 2011 (for Italy, data are available only up
         on-quarter terms) on consumer conﬁdence over        to the third quarter of 2011).
         different sample periods.

         The correlation between consumer conﬁdence and real private consumption growth differs
         signiﬁcantly across countries. Focusing on the four largest euro area countries, the correlation
         with year-on-year private consumption growth is relatively high for Spain, while somewhat
         lower for France and Italy and particularly poor for Germany (see the table). All four countries
         show ﬂuctuations in the correlation over time, with the most recent ﬁve-year period showing a
         higher correlation than the preceding ﬁve-year period.

         Overall, the usefulness of developments in consumer conﬁdence for the assessment of real private
         consumption developments varies across countries and periods. Caution should be exercised in
         deriving conclusions about consumption growth on the basis of consumer conﬁdence owing to
         the instability of relationships at both the country and euro area levels. However, this information
         can be useful in conjunction with other short-term indicators of consumption. The recent
         improvement in euro area consumer conﬁdence may thus be seen as a positive signal for real
         private consumption growth in the period ahead.


       INVESTMENT
       The gradual improvement in gross ﬁxed capital formation over the past two years was interrupted
       in mid-2011. Quarter-on-quarter investment growth shrank by 0.7% in the fourth quarter, implying
       a third quarter of consecutive contraction.

       The full breakdown of capital formation is not yet available for the fourth quarter of 2011.
       Short-term indicators suggest that non-construction investment – which accounts for half of total
       investment – is likely to have been weak. Subdued overall economic and proﬁt developments,
       together with tight ﬁnancing conditions, are expected to have dampened non-construction
       investment growth in the fourth quarter of 2011. Declines in euro area capacity utilisation and
       manufacturing conﬁdence as well as available aggregated country data support this picture.
       Residential and non-residential construction investment is likely to have fallen in the fourth quarter,
       as suggested by the deterioration in monthly production indicators and conﬁdence in the construction
       sector. Overall tighter ﬁnancing conditions may also have dampened construction investment in the
       fourth quarter. In addition, ongoing ﬁscal consolidation in many euro area countries continued to
       weigh on government investment.

       The few early indicators available for the ﬁrst quarter of 2012 suggest continued weakness in
       non-construction capital formation in the euro area. New orders of capital goods from the
       euro area declined further in December 2011. The capacity utilisation rate has broadly stabilised

     ECB
     Monthly Bulletin
78   March 2012
