                      Access to education and training in Europe: Qualitative Reviews


B) Mass participation
On average, over 75 per cent of children are enrolled in pre-primary education in Czech
Republic, Latvia, Denmark, Germany, Estonia, Hungary, Malta, Portugal, Sweden, Iceland,
Norway and Japan. The average access rate is particularly high (over 90 per cent) in
Denmark, Malta, Iceland and Japan. The average enrolment rate in Latvia is the only one not
reaching over 80 per cent.

C) Non-mass participation
An average participation rate among children below the compulsory schooling age remains
below 75 per cent in Austria, Greece, Cyprus, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Poland, Slovenia,
Slovakia, Finland, UK, Bulgaria, Romania, Turkey82 and the United States. When analysing
the figures more closely, the following trends can be detected:
• According to the available statistics, the enrolment rates are the lowest in Turkey (only
     every fifth five-year-old child is enrolled in pre-primary education).
• The average participation rates also remain low in Poland (50%), Lithuania (54.8%),
     Cyprus (55%), Finland (57.6%) and the United States (59.3%). Lithuania, Cyprus and the
     United States are characterised by relatively stable participation rates, although the
     enrolment rates tend to increase during the years closest to the entry to compulsory
     education. The participation in Poland and Finland on the other hand reaches nearly 100
     per cent at the age of 6 when children enrol for a year of pre-primary classes before
     entering compulsory education. These classes are of compulsory nature in Poland, and
     voluntary in Finland.
• A substantial number of children in Lithuania (27%), USA (25%), Cyprus (24%),
     Bulgaria (20%), Romania (18%) and Greece (17%) enter the compulsory school system
     for the first time at primary level.

D) No participation
The Republic of Ireland does not have public pre-primary education systems in a strict sense.

In the Republic of Ireland, there is no national system for pre-school education and the
children can enter primary school at the age of four. The first two classes in primary school
are known as 'infant' classes. The majority of pre-school children are educated within the
primary education system and where pre-school services exist beyond this, they are largely
private in nature and outside the formal education system.




82
  EUROSTAT does not hold data on the participation rates of four-year-old children in Turkey, but only 22.7
per cent of children aged 5 are enrolled in pre-schools.
                                                      3
                                   ECOTEC Research and Consulting Ltd
