                         Access to education and training in Europe: Qualitative Reviews


countries provision of nurseries for children aged under 3 may also come under the ministries
of youth or childhood provision.

Decentralisation of Responsibilities for the Provision

While the national and regional85 authorities in most countries hold the executive and
legislative decision-making power over structural, financial and pedagogical matters,
responsibilities have also been decentralised to local stakeholders (mainly municipalities)
over the past 10-15 years. Decentralisation has been expected to facilitate the development of
pre-school services that are more "client-orientated", address individual needs and reinforce
diversity of choice. The process has also facilitated diversification of the types of provision in
a number of countries86. As an example, a general regulatory framework for the pre-school
provision exists in some of the Nordic countries, but municipalities are now responsible for
deciding the appropriate balance of services, are given a considerable discretion in fixing staff
ratios, and are responsible to a certain extent of the supervision of the services. In Italy and
Portugal, new laws have decentralised responsibilities to the school level which now have the
autonomy to decide staffing levels and budgets. In the new member states, the
decentralisation has enabled the development of privately- or church-operated alternatives,
contributing to a greater diversity in the pre-school provision. In some countries the
decentralisation process was also accompanied by de-regulation to introduce market-driven
policies. For example in England, the Local Early Years and Child Care Development
Partnerships work in partnership with state, private and voluntary providers to expand pre-
school provision, with the aim of improving access.

Responsibilities for the Operation of Pre-primary Establishments

Public providers
Pre-primary education can be operated by public or private providers, and the importance of
different types of providers varies from country to country. In terms of public provision, in
most of the study countries municipalities are responsible for the operation and day-to-day
management of a great majority of pre-school establishments. This applies to countries with
universal/mass/non-mass participation levels, for example Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria,
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, Hungary, Iceland, Italy, Latvia,
Lithuania, Norway, Slovenia and UK.

Regional and national authorities also own and operate some pre-primary schools, although
normally only a small fraction of the total provision in the country. In Romania public
kindergartens are established by county school inspectorates. Austria, Bulgaria, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Japan and Slovak Republic, for example, have directly state funded pre-
schools, although in many cases these tend to be special pre-school institutions (e.g. aimed at
children with disabilities). Communes are responsible for financing and setting up pre-schools
in France and Luxembourg.



85
     In the case of Austria, Belgium and Germany.
86
     OECD: Early Childhood Education and Care.
                                                       7
                                     ECOTEC Research and Consulting Ltd
