                      Access to education and training in Europe: Qualitative Reviews


Social Partners

The role of the social partners in general, and the business community and employers in
particular, in lifelong learning strategies has become increasingly prominent across Europe.
This is in part in recognition of the market failures that exist in the area of adult education and
training, such as labour market imperfections, capital market imperfections and training
market imperfections, which lead to under-investment. In order to address these problems, “A
more structured involvement of employee representatives and the social partners at various
levels of negotiation and dialogue on training”158. Indeed, it is of interest to note that while
“much of the industrial relations literature is focused on the trend towards decentralisation of
bargaining, more flexible use of labour and power shifts from trade unions to employers, the
organisation of CET [continuing education and training] in many countries reflect a different
tendency, i.e. that of increasing dialogue”159.

However, while it is increasingly recognised that it is important to involve the social partners
in shaping adult education and training opportunities through involvement in committees and
partnership, the intensity of the actual involvement and responsibility differs greatly between
countries. In countries such as Belgium, Denmark, Finland, France and the Netherlands the
involvement of employer and employee organisations is particularly important. Such
involvement is partly shaped by a long tradition of social partner involvement in labour
market policies. In contrast, the role of social partner organisations is less pronounced in the
UK and the US. In these countries, the responsibility is left to individual employers and
employees with, for example, the government in the UK promoting the idea among employers
that addressing basic skills should be a normal part of workforce development activity. In the
US, recent evidence shows that consultation on CET (continuing education and training) in
joint labour-management committees is restricted to 4% of union contracts and 8% of those
with 1,000 or more employees, indicating that the role of social partners and bargaining is
very limited160. Moreover, “The use of national tripartite structures as a predominant platform
for social dialogue in acceding and candidate countries has offered only a limited potential in
terms of promoting in practice the concept of responsibility sharing. In fact, the experience of
the transition process in Central and Eastern Europe demonstrates that in most cases
governments have kept a leading role in setting the agenda of these structures while the
possibilities for social partners to have through them an effective influence on the policy
making process [in the area of lifelong learning] have remained rather marginal. This situation
should be linked with the still important deficit in many countries of autonomous social
dialogue at sector and plant levels”161. Between these groups of countries at either end of the
spectrum, there are a number of countries that have a more medium-level involvement of
social partners in shaping adult education and training. These differences are presented in the
table below.



158
    OECD (2003), p.32
159
    OECD (2003), p. 38
160
    OECD
161
    European Commission (2003), Implementing Lifelong Learning Strategies in Europe: Progress report on the
follow-up to the 2002 Council resolution on Lifelong Learning, p. 8
                                                     56
                                  ECOTEC Research and Consulting Ltd
