1.        INTRODUCTION
The European Commission is preparing its proposals for the next research Framework Programme
due to start in 2007. In order to launch a debate a Communication on “Science and Technology, the
key to Europe’s future: Guidelines for future European Union policy to support research” was
published 16 June 2004. 4 Following this, an open consultation was launched on 30 July 2004 to
obtain views and comments on these guidelines with a deadline for responses of 15 October 2004.

This report provides the statistical results and analyses the main messages arising from the online
consultation, where over 1700 responses were received including over 8000 written comments on
the various aspects of the guidelines. In addition to the online responses, the Commission is
receiving a number of position papers and other written contributions for the preparation of the 7th
framework programme proposals. To date, over 100 such documents have been received. In
addition, more detailed information and consultations have been provided regarding the
identification of the research themes for future European Union support.5 Although they are not the
focus of this report, these inputs are being analysed by the Commission in parallel.

The results of the consultation are being used to help the preparation of the Commission’s proposal
for the 7th Framework Programme which is due to be presented in April 2005.


2.        RESPONSES RECEIVED
Commission received a high level of response to the online questionnaire and a total of 1727
responses were received.6 All responses were on a voluntary basis.

Regarding the types of respondent:

     •   115 responses (about 7%) came from large companies. Many leading companies are
         represented from different sectors.

     •   457 responses (about 26%) came from universities/higher education institutes; this also
         represents a strong response, although some responses come from the level of departments
         or research groups rather than the university as a whole.

     •   144 responses (about 8%) came from SMEs represents a good response from this group.
         However, given the diversity in SMEs, more caution is needed in interpretation. It should be
         pointed out that a number of the associations that responded have a large number of SME
         members.

     •   Regarding wider societal interests, around 7% of responses came from associations, 8%
         from government bodies, and 31% from individuals. However given the very different
         nature of their interests, the following analysis does not generally attempt to identify trends
         for these types of respondent.



4
  COM(2004)353, http://europa.eu.int/comm/research/future/index_en.html
5
  http://europa.eu.int/comm/research/future/themes/index_en.html
6
  There were a couple of cases of coordinated actions. In one case a group of researchers from different countries have
put forward comments in favour of a specific research topic. In another case a group of researcher in one country have
submitted duplicates of the same form. However these two cases have not significantly affected the overall outcome of
the statistics.

                                                           3
