                             Access to education and training in Europe: Qualitative Reviews


Table 3: Availability of free pre-primary provision offered in education-orientated institutions
in Europe, 2002/2003

Country BE CZ DK DE EE EL ES FR IE IT CY LV LT LU HU
Public   x  x           x  x  x  x  x     x  x  x  x
Private  x                 x                 x  *  x
Country MT NL AT PL PT SI SK FI SE UK IS NO BG RO
Public   x  *     x  x     x  x     x        x  x
Private  x  *        x        x     x
Source: Eurydice/Eurostat: Key Data on Education in Europe 2005.
* There are no pre-primary education institutions of this kind


Pre-primary education is usually subsidised by local authorities / municipalities, state or
provision is enabled through contributions from parents. Alternatively the operation is
ensured by contributions from all these stakeholders, like in the case of Norway where the
costs are shared between the State, municipalities and parents. In some study countries (e.g.
Hungary, Turkey), participation is free but parents may be asked to contribute towards
activity and school materials (e.g. exercise books). It is also quite common for parents to be
asked to contribute towards the costs of meals and transportation for school trips and optional
extra-curricular activities (such as sports classes). On the other hand in Cyprus, the
government covers the cost of the pre-primary tuition fees and subsidises the equipment
needed, with parents covering all other expenses concerning the operation of the schools (e.g.
staff costs). Similarly, in Estonia, parents are asked to cover the cost of the child’s catering at
their child's institution, and the partial financial coverage of management costs, remuneration
for staff, social tax and the cost of teaching aids. Again the actual amount of the rate covered
by parents will differ according to their means but will in not case exceed 20 per cent of the
minimum wage rate established by the government of the republic.

Responsibilities, Trends and Implications to Access

When looking at the division of responsibilities for the provision and operation of pre-schools
in the study countries, a few clear trends have been detected:

•     There is a growing view of pre-primary education and care as a shared responsibility.
      Traditionally non-parental care before the entry to primary education was seen as inferior
      to the care that parents can provide. There has been a longer-term shift toward a view of
      children's early education and care as a shared responsibility between the family and the
      state, and parents increasingly recognising the role of pre-school in preparing children to
      succeed in formal schooling, the labour force and society as a whole.
•     The overall executive and legislative responsibility has shifted in many of the study
      countries from social to education authorities. This however does not seem to have a
      direct impact on the participation rates.
•     Recent trend of decentralisation and devolution of responsibilities to municipalities level
      (and schools, parents and communities) in a number of study countries (countries with
      universal/mass/non-mass participation levels) has promoted a more co-ordinated working
      at certain localities, however, has also led to some concerns about variation in quality and
                                                                   10
                                             ECOTEC Research and Consulting Ltd
