                      Access to education and training in Europe: Qualitative Reviews


       access across municipalities and regions. These can be demonstrated by examples from
       Sweden and USA. In Sweden, the decentralisation took place during the period of
       recession and resulted in lower quality standards in some municipalities than others93. The
       system from the United States is characterised by a market approach with few national
       guidelines and regulations. And the weak regulative framework has resulted in
       widespread variation in staff-child ratios, and even in health and safety standards and
       access rates. The success rate of decentralisation reforms depends on the local expertise
       and the degree to which a wide range of local stakeholders take part in negotiating the
       local pre-school quality and access standards.
•      As a whole, parents are more integrally engaged in pre-school education than before, but
       the patterns of parent participation differ from country to country. Some of the challenges
       to active engagement of parents include cultural, linguistic, attitudinal and logistical
       barriers. It is relatively common for the study countries to experience difficulties in
       ensuring equitable representation across families from diverse backgrounds.

1.4.       Structures of Provision

Four different models of pre-primary education are dominant in the study countries. Nursery
schools / kindergartens provide the general structure for pre-primary school systems across all
the study countries. In addition, many of the study countries also have complementary pre-
school structures in place. Rural, mobile, home based and integrated services are illustrations
of more flexible and diverse arrangements. Seven study countries have also introduced one-
year pre-school classes and targeted programmes aimed at disadvantaged groups are fairly
common all across the study countries.

Predominant Structure94

The most common structure for the pre-school provision is a 'mono-systemic child focussed,
centre based, professional delivery strategy'95 – generally known as nursery schools /
kindergartens that are typically available for children from the age of 3 to 6. This principal
structure applies to the vast majority of pre-school establishments across the world. The
institutions may be public or private, or they may come under the authorities responsible for
education or other government departments, such as social services or health – but staff
responsible for children's education, almost without exceptions, have qualifications in
education.

This structure is very much predominant in all of the study countries. So the structure is very
similar, but the enrolment age and the age at which children start primary school vary. Czech
Republic, Italy, Cyprus, Luxembourg, Hungary, Germany, Austria, Portugal, Slovak
Republic, Japan and Romania have pre-schools available for children from the age of 3 to 6.
The provision expands over a longer period in other countries, for example pre-primary

93
   OECD: Starting Strong, Early Childhood Education and Care. 2001.
94
   Mainly based on Eurydice/Eurostat: Key Data on Education in 2005.
95
   Leseman (2002) Early Childhood Education and Care for Children from Low-income or Minority
Backgrounds. University of Amsterdam/OECD.
                                                    11
                                  ECOTEC Research and Consulting Ltd
