                                                                Contract number – REM 01
                                                                             Final Report

           holiday pay
           personal income tax
           net salary
7)      Other advantages covered by the contract:
           Health care
           Beneficiary of mandatory pension
           Beneficiary of complementary pension scheme
           Paid maternity leave
           Paid holidays
           Beneficiary of unemployment benefits
           Beneficiary of accident insurance
           Accommodation costs - house / apartment
           Car
           Family supplement
           Children allowances
           Others
The intention of this survey was to reach to the maximum number of researchers in
Europe, in order to assure the best representativeness of the results. In this way,
different actions were undertaken to achieve this goal:

         Presentation of the questionnaire in the majority of the official languages
         of the study countries. The survey was translated into 19 languages
         (Czech, Danish, Dutch, English, Estonian, Finish, French, German, Greek,
         Hungarian, Italian, Latvian, Lithuanian, Polish, Portuguese, Slovak,
         Slovenian, Spanish and Swedish).

         Expansion of the network of contacts to whom the questionnaire was sent
         by the introduction of an invitation text in the e-mail, which encouraged
         the recipient to forward the informative e-mail to any other researcher
         concerned by the study.

         Insertion of a reference or a link to the survey web-site on different
         Internet portals such as CORDIS, The European Researcher's Mobility
         Portal, The Marie Curie Actions web site… and in some publications such as
         the EUA Newsletter 13/2006, which are read by researchers.

                              The survey was launched on the 4th July 2006 by
    Survey launching
                              sending the initial email to the contacts of a delivery
    and management
                              database, which included both researchers and
                              research active organisations. Those contacts were
classified according to the following categories:

   •    Public Administration (PA)

   •    Universities (U)

   •    Research and Technological Centres (RTC)

   •    Big Enterprises (BE): Companies with more than 250 employees.

   •    Small and Medium Enterprises (SME): Companies with less than 250
        employees.

   •    Bridge Bodies (BrB): we have considered Bridge Bodies as those
        organisations or networks of organisations that have access to a large
        research community. Amongst them we may find: Eureka, Network of




CARSA                                                                   Page 27 of 211
