                                                                   Porcine brucellosis (Brucella suis)


BACKGROUND AS PROVIDED BY THE EUROPEAN COMMISSION (DG HEALTH AND
CONSUMER PROTECTION)
1.1. Epidemiology
Porcine brucellosis is a disease affecting domestic and feral pigs which constitute the main
reservoirs. It is also a zoonosis, acquired from handling infected pigs. It is caused by a
bacterium called Brucella suis. There are five different types of this bacterium, called
biotypes, which behave in slightly different ways outside the pig.
In most parts of the world where B. suis infects pigs, the most common biotypes causing
disease are l and 3, with the addition of biotype 2 in Europe. Biotype 2 is enzootic in wild
boar and hare populations in Northern, Central Europe and South-Eastern Europe and these
animal species transmit it to pigs. Porcine brucellosis has also been reported in Austria,
France, Belgium, Germany, Croatia, Portugal and Spain.
B. suis is not present in the United Kingdom or Ireland. It is assumed that it is still enzootic in
the hare populations of Scandinavia and Central Europe, but there is insufficient evidence to
define the precise area where infected hares live. It is also present in the USA, South America,
parts of Asia and Australia.
Once porcine brucellosis is introduced into a pig herd, it is difficult to eliminate. It causes
long-term reproductive losses and some biotypes (1 and 3 particularly) also cause a very
serious disease in humans. Fortunately, the hare biotype-type 2 is less pathogenic to humans
when transmitted.
1.2. EU Legislation
1.2.1. Food Law ("Hygiene Package")
In EU Food Law, brucellosis in animals is listed as a specific hazard and detailed provisions
for the disease to ensure safety of meat and to protect public health have been established
therein. Chapter IX(F) of Section IV of Annex I to Regulation (EC) No 854/2004 of the
European Parliament and of the Council of 29 April 2004 lays down specific rules for the
organisation of official controls on products of animal origin intended for human
consumption2 i.e.:
       1. When animals have reacted positively or inconclusively to a brucellosis test, or there
          are other grounds for suspecting infection, they are to be slaughtered separately from
          other animals, taking precautions to avoid the risk of contamination of other carcases,
          the slaughter line and staff present in the slaughterhouse.
       2. Meat from animals in which post-mortem inspection has revealed lesions indicating
          acute infection with brucellosis is to be declared unfit for human consumption. In the
          case of animals reacting positively or inconclusively to a brucellosis test, the udder,
          genital treat and blood must be declared unfit for human consumption, even if no such
          lesion is found.
1.2.2. Imports to the Community of live pigs and pig meat
Moreover, Council Decision 79/542/EEC of 21 December 1979 drawing up a list of third
countries or parts of third countries, and laying down animal and public health and veterinary
certification conditions for importation into the Community of certain live animals and their

2
    OJ L 155, 30.4.2004, p206


                                                                The EFSA Journal (2009) 1144, 9-112
