                                                                Contract number – REM 01
                                                                             Final Report




5.4 Annex 4: Principal indexes and cost of
    living indicators
In this annex, the available data of the principal indexes and cost of living
indicators chosen for the study are presented.



5.4.1         Consumer Price Index
The Consumer Price Index (CPI) measures the change in the cost of a bundle of
consumer goods and services. The bundle includes about 200 types of goods and
thousands of actual products, ranging from foods and energy to expensive
consumer goods. The prices are measured by taking a sample of prices at different
stores. The CPI is also important because it is used to adjust the annual changes to
Social Security payments. This way it provides a measure of inflation. This is why
frequently the CPI is called a cost-of-living index. But it differs in important ways
from a complete cost-of-living measure. A cost-of-living index is a conceptual
measurement goal, however, not a straightforward alternative to the CPI. A cost-
of-living index would measure changes over time in the amount that consumers
need to spend to reach a certain utility level or standard of living. User fees (such
as water and sewer service) and sales and excise taxes paid by the consumer are
included in CPI, while income taxes and investments items (like stocks, bonds, life
insurance and homes) are not included. It is very difficult to determine the proper
treatment of public goods, such as safety and education, and other broad concerns,
such as health, water quality, and crime that would constitute a complete cost-of-
living framework.

The CPI is used all around the world as an important economic indicator, principally
to measure inflation. However, its calculation is different between Europe and the
United States:

   o    The “CPI” in the Eurozone

In addition to their national consumer price indices, the Member States of the
European Union also produce a harmonised index of consumer prices (HICP),
published by the European Central Bank (ECB). The HICPs have been set up to
provide the best measure for international comparisons of household inflation
within the Euro-zone and the EU.

   o    CPI in the United States

On the other hand, concerning the calculation and use of the CPI in the US, most of
the specific CPI indexes have a 1982-84 reference base in Bureau of Labour
Statistics (BLS) (www.bls.gov), who sets the average index level (representing the
average price level) for the 36-month period covering the years 1982, 1983, and
1984 equal to 100.

The CPI reflects spending patterns for each of two population groups: all urban
consumers and urban wage earners and clerical workers. The price change
experience of the all urban consumer group is measured by two indexes:

   - The traditional Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers (CPI-U)



CARSA                                                                   Page 82 of 211
