                     Access to education and training in Europe: Qualitative Reviews


Role of Parents

In most countries the role of parents (the guardians or the carers of the children), is viewed as
a crucial supplement to pre-primary education in the process of bringing up a child. Parent
engagement to the pre-school education promotes positive attitudes toward children's learning
and supports parent and community empowerment89. The main responsibility for children’s
education lies with the family, and the education providers' function is primarily to provide a
supporting, pedagogic environment for the child's development. Informal contact between the
institutions and parents is therefore viewed as important because parents can assist the school
staff to tailor educational programmes to the needs of particular children or groups. This
contact is mainly facilitated through meetings between education providers and parents. In
Portugal for example, school-based parent associations defend and promote the interests of
their children through joint meetings with the school leaders. In Denmark, the Netherlands
and Norway parents have a clearly defined role in planning and running pre-school activities,
including financial and staffing decisions. In Norway this relationship is formalised through
parents' participation in the co-ordinating committees of the pre-schools establishments and
through parents' councils. In the case of Cyprus, approximately 53 per cent of pre-school
establishments are run in collaboration with parents' associations and local authorities (and are
subsidised by the Ministry of Education and Culture). There are pre-primary schools in
Iceland that are fully operated by associations set up by parents and in Czech Republic90 a
trend (since 1989) toward decentralised decision-making has increased parental influence on
the pre-primary provision at local level.

Parents may also have to contribute to the funding of the provision as only a few of the study
countries provide either fully free or partly free pre-primary education. Belgium and
Luxembourg are the only countries where participation to pre-primary education is free of
charge for everyone in both public and private establishments. Many other countries have free
public pre-primary schools, whereas enrolment fees are often payable in the private sector.
Only Denmark, Germany, Estonia, Cyprus, Austria, Slovenia, Sweden, Iceland and Norway
do not have free public pre-primary schools (see Table 3)91. Means-tested pre-school fee
system is prevalent across the study countries, including Austria, Finland, Sweden, Portugal
and Romania. There would appear to be no direct relation between free pre-primary education
and participation rates as high participation rates are apparent in some countries where the
admission is fee-paying, and relatively low in some where it is free (at least in the public
sector)92.




89
   OECD: Staying Strong, Early Childhood Education and Care in the USA.
90
   OECD: Staying Strong, Early Childhood Education and Care.
91
   EURYDICE/EUROSTAT: Key Data on Education in 2005.
92
   EURYDICE/EUROSTAT: Key Data on Education in 2005.
                                                    9
                                 ECOTEC Research and Consulting Ltd
