                          Access to education and training in Europe: Qualitative Reviews


The following table outlines the authorities responsible for the provision of pre-schools in a
number of the other study countries:

Table 2: Distribution of responsibilities in pre-primary education
COUNTRY                 RESPONSIBILITY
Japan                   Kindergartens that provide pre-school education to children 3 to 6 years of age are
                        under the authority of the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and
                        Technology (MEXT). Nursery schools are for children under 6 years of age whose
                        parents are at work, and are the responsibility of the Health, Labour and Welfare
                        Ministry.
Denmark                 Pre-primary institutions, such as day nurseries (0-3) and kindergartens (3-7), are
                        the responsibility of the Ministry of Social Affairs and are run by the
                        municipalities or independent / private bodies. On the other hand, pre-school
                        classes (5-7), which are often attached to primary schools, come directly under the
                        responsibility of the Ministry of Education.
Finland                 From birth to the age of six, children can attend day-care centres (kindergartens)
                        or family day-care groups in private homes. The Ministry of Social Affairs and
                        Health is in charge of this provision. Each local authority is also obliged to
                        provide pre-school classes for all children in the year preceding the start of basic
                        education (which begins at the age of seven) either in kindergartens or primary
                        schools. Ministry of Education together with the National Board for Education are
                        responsible for providing the pedagogical and quality framework for pre-school
                        classes.
Norway                  Pre-primary (0-5) education is the responsibility of the Ministry of Children and
                        Family Affairs. School provision as such starts with compulsory primary
                        education.
Portugal                Ministry of Education is responsible for running most of the nursery schools in the
                        country but also Ministry of Labour and Solidarity is responsible for a proportion
                        of pre-school establishments, mainly those with emphasis on family support.
Scotland (UK)           The Scottish Executive Education Department (SEED) has responsibility for pre-
                        school provision.
Turkey                  Ministry of Education is responsible for providing pre-primary education in
                        nursery classes (for children aged 3 to 6) and 'practical' nursery classes (5-6).
                        Responsibility for day nurseries, nursery schools and child care institutions are the
                        responsibility of other ministries and institutions in the educational or care sector.


In terms of children aged under 3, the ministries of education also carry the responsibility for
the provision of formal day-care / pre-school provisions in many of the study countries. For
example, in the Baltic States, Slovenia, Spain and Sweden ministries of education are the only
authority responsible for pre-primary provision to one-year-olds. However, in many countries
other ministries are responsible for child care services (0-3), which are not part of pre-primary
education provision as such84. For example in France, responsibility for the care for children
under the age of three belongs to the municipalities and the ministry of social affairs. In other


84
     See the Section 1 for the European definition of a pre-primary institute.
                                                            6
                                        ECOTEC Research and Consulting Ltd
