                                     STAFF REGULATIONS - Annex II

                                                   Article 3 (8)
The Joint Committee shall meet when convened by the appointing authority or at the request of the Staff
Committee.
The proceedings of the Committee shall be valid only if all members or, in their absence, their alternates are
present.
The chairman of the Committee shall not vote save on questions of procedure.
The opinion of the Committee shall be communicated in writing to the appointing authority and to the Staff
Committee within five days of its adoption.
Any member of the Committee may require that his views be recorded in the opinion of the Committee.

                                               Article 3a (69) (96)
The common Joint Committee shall meet at the request either of the appointing authority referred to in
Article 2(2) of the Staff Regulations or of an appointing authority or a Staff Committee of one of the institutions
represented on that Joint Committee.
The proceedings of the common Joint Committee shall be valid only if all members or their alternates are
present.
The Chairman of the common Joint Committee shall not vote save on questions of procedure.
The opinion of the common Joint Committee shall be communicated in writing to the appointing authority
within the meaning of Article 2(2) of the Staff Regulations, to the other appointing authorities and to their Staff
Committees within five days of its adoption.
Any member of the common Joint Committee may require that his views be recorded in the opinion of the Joint
Committee.

                                      Section 3 Disciplinary Board (96)
                                                  Repealed

                                                  Article 4 (96)
                                                    Repealed

                                                  Article 5 (96)
                                                    Repealed

                                                  Article 6 (96)
                                                    Repealed

                                       Section 3: Invalidity Committee
                                                Article 7 (8) (24)
The Invalidity Committee shall consist of three doctors :
– one appointed by the institution to which the official concerned belongs;
– one appointed by the official concerned; and
– one appointed by agreement between the first two doctors.
Should the official concerned fail to appoint a doctor, the President of the Court of Justice of the European
Communities shall appoint one.
In the event of failure to agree on the appointment of a third doctor within two months of the appointment of the
second doctor, the third shall be appointed by the President of the Court of Justice of the European
Communities at the request of one of the parties concerned.

                                                     I - 47
