                       Access to education and training in Europe: Qualitative Reviews


through tuition and student support policies may have harmed access for students from lower
socio-economic groups (McPherson and Schapiro, 1998; Heller, 2001). The studies that do
report an impact of tuition and student support on access particularly show that lower-SES
students choose shorter, cheaper, less prestigious, and less risky educational opportunities
(Heller, 1997; McPherson and Schapiro, 1997)”. This would locate debates on the impact of
tuition fees in the domain of studies of social justice, rather than in the domain of access
studies.

Based on data for the Netherlands the findings in the above mentioned study correspond well
to the general picture from the literature that students are not very responsive to financial
incentives. Nevertheless, trends toward (further) cost sharing often encounter opposition and
are argued to have negative effects on access to higher education, particularly for those from
disadvantaged backgrounds. In view of this study’s major findings, this opposition can be
explained by students’ strong perceptions of financial incentives and differences for students
from various SES-backgrounds. However, the results also show that differences in
perceptions do not automatically lead to different choices. Maybe therefore, no single Dutch
study to date has been able to show that increased cost sharing has harmed access for
disadvantaged students. Student numbers have steadily increased irrespective of demographic
developments and the socio-economic composition of the student body has not changed over
time (De Jong et al., 1991; Hofman et al., 2003). The major finding that different price
perceptions do not necessarily lead to different choices is also consistent with international
student choice literature.

Also other empirical studies give ample opportunities to consider the impact of tuition policy
on enrolment in higher education — but they fall short of permitting a summary conclusion
that freezing, reducing or introducing tuition fees will have a predictable effect. The fact is,
there are many complex social issues that influence a decision to attend university; tuition is
just one of them149. This suggests that variation and trends in enrolment are the result of a
complex interaction of factors, as illustrated in our theoretical framework, only some of them
based on price. As well, some argue that tuition fees have a relatively small effect on
enrolment because they typically represent the smaller cost of attending a post-secondary
educational institution. Other costs, such as the opportunity costs associated with foregone
earnings, housing costs and other costs of living, are much higher than direct costs for tuition
fees.

2.6.     Barriers to take-up of educational opportunities

One of the barriers to the take up educational opportunities often highlighted, relate to the
financial contributions that students have to make while attending higher education –although
we have seen that the effect of tuition fees on access is not as strong as often presumed. To
compensate for these contributions students can apply for grants (which do not have to be
repaid by students) or make use of loans (which do, after their period of study). The financial
support for students in the Member States of the European Union and the EFTA/EEA


149
  Swail, W.S., Heller, D.E., Changes in tuition policy. Natural policy experiments in five countries. Canada
Millennium Scholarship Foundation, 2004.
                                                      42
                                   ECOTEC Research and Consulting Ltd
