                                                                 Contract number – REM 01
                                                                              Final Report

researchers (total yearly salary) per level of experience obtained in the study was
within the usual range of remunerations or not.

The data on the remunerations of the Universities was cross checked with the
following persons or entities within each organisation, as presented below:
   o    Austria. Universität für Bodenkultur, Vice-rector for research Martin
        Gerzabek.
   o    Belgium. Faculté Politechnique de Mons, Ms Magali Crouquet.
   o    Bulgaria. Technical University of Gabrovo, Ms Markova.
   o    Denmark. University of Aalborg, Ms Susanne B. Hansen; University of
        Copenhagen, Ms Gyrithe Hjorth Blichfeldt; University of Roskilde, Ms Mette
        Seistrup;
   o    Estonia. University of Tartu, Ms Kaili Kõiv (Head Specialist in Compensation
        and Work Arrangement).
   o    Finland. University of Oulu, Administrative director Hannu Pietilä; University
        of Vaasa, Ms Cucinotta, Head of International Relations.
   o    France. Institut national de physique nucléaire et de physique des particules
        (IN2P3) Ms Michele Layne (Assistant-management – Human Resources,
        Project Division IN2P3). Université de Paris VII - Denis Diderot, Mr Villar.
   o    Germany. Fraunhofer        Institute,   Dr.   Raoul   Klingner    (Fraunhofer-
        Gesellschaft).
   o    Hungary. Pazmany Peter Catholic University, Administrative department.
   o    Iceland. Reykjavik University, Mr Jóhann Hjartarson.
   o    Ireland. The Dublin Institute of Technology, Administrative department.
        Trinity College, Dublin, Administrative department.
   o    Italy. University of Torino, Ms Silvia Forno (Research and International
        Relations); University of Roma, Ms Antonella Cammisa; Università degli
        Studi di Trento, Dra. Paola Antonicelli (Administrative and Personnel
        department).
   o    Luxembourg. University du Luxembourg, Mme Damienne Valentin (Head of
        the Human Resources department).
   o    Malta. University of Malta. Administrative department.
   o    Netherlands. University of Leiden, Administrative department. Utrecht
        University, Human Resources department of the veterinary faculty.
        University of Maastrich, Mr Philip van Engelen, Administrative Service
        Center.

   o    Norway. University of      Trondheim,    Mr   Øyvin   Sæter,     Research    and
        Development Adviser.
   o    Poland. University of Warmia and Mazury in Olsztyn, Ms Agnieszka
        Kowalska.
   o    Portugal, University Nova of Lisboa, Carmo Sampaio, rector of the
        University; University do Porto, Ms Teresa Mata.
   o    Romania. Technical University of Civil Engineering Bucharest (UTCB), Vice-
        Rector for Research and Development.
   o    Spain. CIEMAT, Centro de Investigaciones Energéticas, Medioambientales y
        Tecnológicas, Jose Miguel Domingo Casado (Head of the retributions



CARSA                                                                     Page 38 of 211
