                   Access to education and training in Europe: Qualitative Reviews


These statistics also demonstrate a trend where enrolment rates tend to increase during the
years closest to the entry to compulsory education.

1.3.    Responsibilities of Different Stakeholders

This section describes the division of responsibilities between national and local public
authorities, private providers and parents in the design, delivery and operation of pre-primary
education in the study countries. It focuses on assessing the situation where the national (and
regional and state) authorities generally provide the quality, funding and legislative
framework for pre-primary provision, although recent developments in a number of the study
countries have displayed a trend of decentralisation where responsibilities have been devolved
to municipalities, private providers and families. This shift has been motivated by efforts to
bring decision-making and delivery closer to the people being served and to adapt services to
meet local needs and circumstances.

Responsibilities for the Provision of Pre-primary Education at National Level

The responsibility for providing the overall regulative framework (most often pedagogical,
funding and quality measures) for pre-primary education from the age of 3 or 4 falls on
ministries of education in a great majority of the study countries. The responsibility, however,
has shifted in many of these countries from the social and health authorities to the education
authorities over the past 10 years. This shows a clear trend in the way in which many
governments view pre-school education as an element of the wider education system rather
than only as a form of childcare. For example, in all the new Member States and Accession
countries the national ministries for education hold the responsibility for the framework and
the quality of the pre-primary provision. A similar situation also applies to half of the study
countries with universal access to pre-school: France and Italy.

In four of the study countries, the responsibility for pre-school provision belongs to the
regional authorities. The situation applies, for example, to Austria, Belgium and Germany
where it is the duty of the regional authorities to provide the structural, financial and
pedagogical pre-school arrangements. In Austria, nursery school provision is entrusted to the
provinces (Austrian länder) in both legislative and executive matters. In Belgium, the Federal
government awards financial resources for each Community for education, and each
Community government exercises executive power over the organisation, administration,
structure and curricula of education. In Germany, the most traditional form of pre-school
education, kindergartens (available for children aged 3 to 6), are the responsibility of the
ministry of social affairs in each länder, except in Bavaria or Lower Saxony where the
ministries of education are in charge of this provision. But pre-primary classes (for five-year-
olds who have not yet reached compulsory schooling age) in primary schools tend to be the
responsibility of educational authorities in each länder. In the United States, the overall
responsibility for the pre-school provision and child care is devolved almost completely to the
individual states, although the system has traditionally relied on market approaches with fairly
little government (state or federal) regulation.



                                                 5
                               ECOTEC Research and Consulting Ltd
