                      Access to education and training in Europe: Qualitative Reviews


Private stakeholders also play an important role in setting up, operating and managing pre-
schools in some of the study countries. The following paragraph will explore the role and
responsibilities of private stakeholders in more detail.

Private providers
Private provision includes for-profit and non-profit services that are managed by an individual
or private organisation. Private non-profit providers include voluntary and community groups
(e.g. parent co-operatives), churches with the legal status of charities or other non-profit
organisations. Private provision may be fully or partly publicly-funded or entirely privately-
funded. In many countries private pre-school providers must meet the same quality standards
as those run by municipalities (or the state), in others quality standards between providers
differ as content and structure is not standardised.

As mentioned, decentralisation and devolution of pre-primary service provision to the local
level have facilitated the diversification of providers, meaning privatisation of services in
some cases. In spite of this development, non-public nursery schools still remain less common
in countries with fairly low levels of overall participation, for example in the new Member
States and candidate countries (e.g. Czech Republic, Lithuania, Poland, Bulgaria, Slovenia,
Romania and Turkey). However, Romanian and Czech authorities interviewed for this study
have noted they are receiving more and more requests from private organisations to set up
kindergartens. In the UK, the division between public and private pre-primary structure has
become less distinct. Publicly-funded early-year's education is being expanded and developed
in co-operation with the private and voluntary sectors.

Private providers in some countries were found to be increasingly prevalent due a lack of
adequate state provision. For example, in the US millions of children, especially those
children from low-income families, do not have access to early care and education due to a
limited state provision87. Accessing quality early education in the US is both expensive and
difficult, as availability and financial assistance are scarce relative to the demand88. The
prevalence of privately funded providers has also increased in Germany (particularly in
Eastern Germany) where approximately 70 per cent of kindergartens are run by independent
bodies such as churches, voluntary and charitable associations (Verbände der Freien
Wohlfahrtspflege). Nearly 60 per cent of kindergartens in Japan are private, while 40 per cent
of children in Italy attend non-state institutions.




87
  OECD: Early Childhood Education and Care in the USA.
88
  Williams & Mitchell: The Status of Early Care and Education in the States. The Institute for Women's Policy
Research.
                                                      8
                                   ECOTEC Research and Consulting Ltd
