                                                                                                                                                       ECONOMIC
                                                                                                                                                   AND MONETARY
                                                                                                                                                   DEVELOPMENTS

                                                                                                                                                              Fiscal
                                                                                                                                                       developments




target under the excessive deﬁcit procedure (from 2013 to 2015). Chart B shows that in the
adverse scenario the declining proﬁle of government debt starts to accelerate from 2015 onwards
and the debt ratio reaches around 110% of GDP by 2020.

Potential impact of structural reforms

The second scenario tries to capture the impact of structural reforms on GDP growth and thus
on debt dynamics. This impact is calibrated by including in the baseline scenario the effect of
a reduction in the wage and price mark-ups obtained with simulations using the ECB’s Euro
Area and Global Economy model.2 While structural reforms are currently being implemented
in Portugal and progress has been already made in a number of key areas, analytical models
usually indicate that their effects on GDP are not immediate. Hence, following the indications
from model-based results, the baseline scenario is adjusted upwards only from 2015 onwards
(see Chart A). The calibrated upward adjustment is such that real GDP growth reaches 3%
by 2017 (i.e. ﬁve years after the implementation of structural reforms).3 Higher growth has a
positive budgetary impact and the ﬁscal balance as a percentage of GDP improves substantially,
from -0.5% in 2015 to a surplus of about 3.5% by 2020.

Chart B shows that the impact of higher GDP growth in the medium term has a large impact on
debt dynamics. The decline of the government debt ratio in this case is substantial and the stock
of debt falls to below 80% of GDP by 2020, i.e. close to the pre-2009 crisis level. This illustrates
that the full implementation of the structural reform programme can make a major contribution
to achieving a sustained and swift decline in the government debt ratio.

Conclusions

The above analysis shows that under prudent assumptions regarding GDP growth, primary
balance and stock-ﬂow adjustments,4 government debt dynamics for Portugal would quickly
stabilise, with a subsequent steady decline in the debt ratio. Even in the absence of higher growth
arising from structural reforms, government debt would fall below 100% by the end of the
scenario horizon. In the case of a decline in GDP signiﬁcantly larger than in the baseline and
assuming a two-year delayed adjustment to the ﬁscal balance, the debt ratio would also stabilise
in 2013, and visibly decline from 2015 onwards. In the scenario which includes the effect of
structural reforms on GDP, government debt would reach about 77% of GDP by 2020.

Portugal’s primary ﬁscal structural adjustment has been signiﬁcant so far (at around
3.5% of GDP) – a fact also reﬂected in a large correction of the current account. This result
has been obtained with a more limited fall in GDP in 2011 than initially envisaged. Moreover,
privatisation receipts have been larger than estimated and the structural reform programme
is on track. While the achievements so far have been very positive, the strong resolve shown

2 See S. Gomes, P. Jacquinot, M. Mohr, M. Pisani, “Structural reforms and macroeconomic performance in the euro area countries.
  A model-based assessment”, Working Paper Series, No 1323, ECB, 2011.
3 According to the Euro Area and Global Economy model, the impact of a reduction of 15% in wage and price mark-ups lead to a
  cumulated increase in GDP of about 8% over seven years.
4 About 66% of the privatisation receipts expected for 2012 and 2013 materialised at the beginning of 2012. Moreover, debt projections
  include €12 billion, a sum which under the ﬁnancial assistance programme has been earmarked for banks’ capitalisation needs
  (Bank Solvency Support Facility). If only part of this amount were to be used, a downward correction of the debt-to-GDP ratio should
  be made.




                                                                                                                                       ECB
                                                                                                                           Monthly Bulletin
                                                                                                                               March 2012     99
